King wins panel approval despite Democrats' opposition

With help from Tanya Snyder and Brianna Gurciullo

TAG, YOU’RE IT: The Senate Commerce Committee approved Heidi King's nomination to lead NHTSA on a razor-thin, party-line vote Wednesday after it was initially scuttled last month due to fears of low Republican attendance. Ranking member Bill Nelson (D-Fla.) said he was voting no because King "lacks the fire in the belly to protect consumers from something which is killing" people — meaning, defective Takata airbags. Chairman John Thune (R-S.D.) told reporters afterward he thought the unanimous Democratic opposition was “driven by Nelson” and that other Democrats “fell in line behind him.” Sen. Ed Markey (D-Mass.), though, cited a different reason for voting no: fuel economy standards, which he said King wants to roll back.

Story Continued Below

What’s next: King could be the next nominee to sit in the purgatory that's plaguing FTA nominee Thelma Drake — committee-approved but awaiting a vote by the full Senate. Calendar issues are undoubtedly a factor, but Democratic opposition could continue to dog King. No senator has yet copped to putting a hold on her confirmation on the floor, but we’ll be polling members to find out what’s in store.

FINANCE TO KEEP LOW PROFILE ON FAA BILL: The Senate Finance Committee could hold a markup of its own on the FAA bill’s tax title, but it probably won’t — at least according to a Commerce Committee staffer on Wednesday. He said Finance will probably bring its tax title as an amendment once the bill hits the floor. Commerce leaders are hotlining the FAA bill (S. 1405 (115)) to clear up any issues that could bog down passage and squeeze it into as little time as possible on the Senate floor.

Note: Now that the Senate’s top priority is confirming a new Supreme Court justice before the midterms, floor time is at an all-time premium.

IT’S THURSDAY: Thanks for tuning in to POLITICO’s Morning Transportation, your daily tipsheet on all things trains, planes, automobiles and ports. Stephanie is your driver. Send tips, scoops and song requests to @Steph_Beasley or sbeasley@politico.com.

In the town where I was born / Lived a man who sailed to sea / And he told us of his life / In the land of submarines / So we sailed up to the sun / Till we found a sea of green / And we lived beneath the waves / In our yellow submarine

LISTEN HERE: Follow MT’s playlist on Spotify. What better way to start your day than with songs (picked by us and readers) about roads, rails, rivers and runways?

POLITICO will be reporting from inside the World Gas Conference June 25-29. Sign up now for our pop-up conference newsletter to receive on-the-ground insights and information every afternoon from POLITICO Pro Energy Editor Matt Daily.

NOT-SO-HAPPY ANNIVERSARY: Wednesday marked one year since the House Energy and Commerce Digital Commerce and Consumer Protection Subcommittee held the first hearing on its self-driving car bill (H.R. 3388 (115)), which the full committee unanimously approved and then sailed through a voice vote on the House floor — only to be met with months of stagnation in the Senate. “We’re running out of time,” Subcommittee Chairman Bob Latta (R-Ohio) told our Tanya Snyder. “I’m very concerned that if we don’t get this done, we’ll have this patchwork [of state regulations] and we’re going to have companies from other countries developing this technology and it won’t be here.” He also said the uptick in traffic deaths compels them to act.

Kick in the pants: “You look at an industry that’s just a hair under a trillion dollars, we move a piece of legislation of this magnitude out with bipartisanship with a unanimous vote, I think that speaks volumes,” Latta said. He and ranking member Jan Schakowsky (D-Ill.) wrote an op-ed recently and have put out several press releases as the anniversary approached urging the Senate to act.

SETTING THEIR SIGHTS A LITTLE LOWER: Safety groups have pressed the Senate Commerce Committee to include semi-autonomous vehicles in its driverless car bill, and it seems they’re listening. Staffers, if not members, are discussing the inclusion of Level 2 vehicles in the bill — which can steer, accelerate and brake themselves but leave drivers to do the more sophisticated tasks — in the wake of high-profile crashes involving Tesla’s Autopilot. In both of those crashes, the people behind the wheel apparently overestimated the car's abilities and failed to take over the controls when prompted. Tanya has more for Pros.

SECURITY BILLS CLEAR COMMITTEE: The Senate Commerce Committee approved several transportation security bills by voice vote Wednesday. One (S. 3094 (115)) would specify that the Coast Guard can only require the use of biometric readers for transportation worker ID cards after it submits an assessment of the program. Another bill (H.R. 4467 (115)) would require the Federal Air Marshal Service to use risk-based strategies when allocating resources for international and domestic flight coverage. And another (H.R. 4559 (115)) would direct TSA to review improving global aviation security standards, including cybersecurity standards, across the global aviation system.

SUMMER, SUMMER, SUMMER TIME: TSA expects to see a surge in airport travel volumes in the lead up to the July Fourth holiday, agency chief David Pekoske told reporters Wednesday. He said 2.6 million travelers are expected to go through security checkpoints this Friday alone. “We expect that this coming Friday will potentially be one of the busiest days ever in TSA history in terms of passenger throughput,” he said. The spike will occur as the agency also works with international airports to implement new rules requiring additional screening of powders in carry-on bags, starting on Saturday. The procedures, which include asking passengers to remove food items and other clutter from bags, are already in effect domestically.

The impact: Pekoske said during normal travel periods, the majority of PreCheck passengers get through checkpoints within 10 minutes and the bulk of regular travelers typically wait no more than 20 minutes. But it can increase to 45 or 60 minutes when lanes are pushed to capacity, he said. He advised travelers to arrive early.

More ch-ch-changes: Pekoske also noted that an interim final rule from TSA and Customs and Border Protection that requires advanced screening of all air cargo entering the U.S. went into effect earlier this month. The new policy “allows us to do a process quite similar actually to what we do with passengers when passengers buy a ticket,” he said. “[W]e check passengers against our databases and assign risk based on those results. We’re doing the very same thing for cargo.”

The land of tomorrow: TSA and CBP also are in discussions about merging PreCheck and Global Entry and streamlining enrollment for “trusted travelers,” Pekoske said. But he added that the process could take a year or more to complete.

LET ME EXPLAIN: Delta Air Lines caught some flak last week for not pressing the Trump administration to avoid using its planes to carry separated migrant children — which set Delta apart from American, United and other airlines. Delta did release a statement after President Donald Trump issued an executive order on the matter, saying: “Recent reports of families being separated are disheartening and do not align with Delta’s core values.” Defending his company Wednesday during a National Press Club event, Delta CEO Ed Bastian said that “many of the actions that were interpreted as separating” families at the time were actually actions to fly “kids to reunite [them] with families.” He added that “the story got out before the facts got out,” and Delta wanted to “understand the facts” before making a statement.

THE ‘NANNY DOGS’: A pit bull owner has launched a petition on the Care2 website against Delta’s impending restrictions on service animals, including a ban on pit bulls and "bully" breeds. “As more people become aware that we should be blaming the deed, not the breed, the trend worldwide has been to end bans against certain dogs,” Kelsey Bourgeois, the author of the petition, said. “Apparently Delta did not get the memo.” Delta is one of several airlines implementing new rules in the wake of what it says has been an uptick in animal-related attacks and other incidents on flights. Delta’s new service animal rules go into effect July 10. The petition currently has more than 26,000 signatures.

STATE OF AIR TRAVEL: A new Morning Consult travel report shows that the majority of Americans still prefer to get around in their cars, but when they do choose to fly, most consider Southwest, American, Delta and United to be the top choices. And Southwest enjoys the most favorable opinions, overall. Other findings of note were that 74 percent of people polled considered ticket cost the most important factor when mulling air travel and also that costs for premium services outweighed airline preferences when it came to choosing a carrier.

THE AUTOBAHN:

— "Blind pedestrians sue the city to improve crosswalk safety." The New York Times.

— “Delta CEO looks to Asia, Europe for revenue growth.” USA Today.

— “Facebook ends Aquila internet drone project.” The Drive.

— “Boston braces for robo-taxis to make downtown traffic even worse.” Bloomberg.

— “The elevated era.” Curbed New York.

THE COUNTDOWN: DOT appropriations run out in 95 days. The FAA reauthorization expires in 95 days. Highway and transit policy is up for renewal in 826 days.