ARTICLE:We need 46 more Congressional votes to force a vote on restoring Net NeutralityWe need 46 more Congressional votes to force a vote on restoring Net Neutrality

The Discharge Petition that cleared the Senate in May is struggling in the House (as we knew it would).

The petition needs 218 House signatures to force a vote on whether to overrule Ajit Pai and the FCC and bring back Net Neutrality. It's been stalled at 172 for two weeks.

Here's how to check where your rep stands. You can use the same tool to call your lawmaker and remind them that there's an election coming up and you don't appreciate anyone fucking with your internet, and you'll remember who stood up for Big Telco when the polls open.

A discharge petition needs 218 signatures to force a House vote on the same net neutrality bill, and 218 votes would also be enough to pass the measure. So far, the petition has signatures from 172 representatives, all Democrats. That number hasn't changed in two weeks. "We're 46 [signatures] away from being able to force a vote on the resolution to restore the Open Internet Order," Sen. Ed Markey (D-Mass.) tweeted yesterday.

Bill to save net neutrality is 46 votes short in US House [Jon Brodkin/Ars Technica]

(via /.)ARTICLE:Effort To Save Net Neutrality Via Congressional Review Act Appears Stuck In NeutralEfforts to reverse the FCC's historically unpopular attack on net neutrality using the Congressional Review Act (CRA) appear stuck in neutral.

The CRA lets Congress reverse a regulatory action with a simply majority vote in the Senate and the House (which is how the GOP successfully killed FCC privacy protections last year). And while the Senate voted 52 to 47 back in May to reverse the FCC's attack on net neutrality, companion efforts to set up a similar vote in the House don't appear to be gaining much traction as the clock continues to tick. A discharge petition needs 218 votes to even see floor time, and another 218 votes to pass the measure.

But so far, the petition only currently has 172 likely votes, all Democrats:

The House #NetNeutrality discharge petition is at 172 signatures. We’re 46 away from being able to force a vote on the resolution to restore the Open Internet Order. Has your representative signed the petition to #SaveTheInternet? Check here: https://t.co/zKI7sxSwGj — Ed Markey (@SenMarkey) June 26, 2018

Again, not a single Republican in the House has signaled any interest in saving net neutrality. As we've long noted, the quest for a healthy internet free from anti-competitive meddling by telecom monopolies has long been idiotically framed as a partisan issue despite broad, bipartisan consumer support. ISPs and their numerous political proxy organizations have long enjoyed using rhetoric that only further fuels these divisions (derailing real consensus) by conflating meaningful consumer protections with a "government takeover of the internet," ideas that are happily parroted by many ISP cash-loving DC lawmakers.

Undaunted, net neutrality activists held an advocacy day yesterday trying to drum up some additional support among lawmakers among a clearly debate-fatigued public. Another net neutrality group, Fight for the Future, has constructed this page to track which lawmakers haven't signed on, while making it easy to contact those that haven't.

That said, this effort was always an uphill climb. Even if the CRA vote succeeded in the House, it would have to avoid a veto by Trump. Many activists I've spoken to believe a vote in both Houses would appeal to Trump's "populist" streak forcing him to bend to the whims of public consensus. But given Trump's version of populism tends to be as authentic as a Hollywood Wild West set and as consistent as a brush fire, that prediction always seemed a tad optimistic. Still, stranger things have happened, so maintaining hope in the face of this level of corruption isn't entirely outrageous.

That said, the best path forward for reversing the repeal is two fold. One, there remains a notable chance that the courts see the FCC's fraud-riddled net neutrality repeal as the blatant, facts-optional nonsense it actually is, and reverses it for being an "arbitrary and capricious" abuse of procedural norms and the FCC's obligation to represent the public. If that doesn't work, there's always voting in the the midterms and thereafter for a new breed of lawmakers that don't mindlessly place ISP campaign contributions above the welfare of the public, the internet, and genuine, healthy competition.ARTICLE:Hundreds arrested at Washington protest over Trump immigration policyNearly 600 protesters, mostly women, were arrested on Thursday after they staged a non-violent action in the heart of a US Senate office building in Washington against Donald Trump’s “zero-tolerance” policy towards immigrants and separation of families at the border.

The mass protest was one of several demonstrations that erupted across the country, providing a taste of what are expected to be much larger demonstrations on Saturday called by the Women’s March and the Center for Popular Democracy Action. The rallies are likely to get a further boost as a result of the announcement on Wednesday by Anthony Kennedy that he is retiring from the US supreme court, providing Trump with the chance to make a second ultra-conservative appointment to the nation’s highest court and prompting fears of a rollback of liberal protections.

Facebook Twitter Pinterest Demonstrators in opposition to the immigration policies of the Trump administration rally at the Hart Senate office building. Photograph: Jonathan Ernst/Reuters

The largest demonstration on Thursday saw the 90ft atrium of the Hart Senate office building overrun by hundreds of women who sat on the floor pumping their fists in the air. Many were draped in foil sheets as a statement on the flimsy bedding given to children and adults as they are held at US border detention facilities.

The protesters chanted “abolish Ice” and “we care” – a jab at Melania Trump for wearing a jacket with the words “I really don’t care, do U?” painted on its back as she visited one of the immigrant detention centers in Texas last week.

Among those arrested in the Senate building were Pramila Jayapal, a Democratic member of Congress representing Seattle. She said in a video posted on social media that she had joined the action to protest against “the inhumane and cruel ‘zero-tolerance’ policy of Donald Trump and this administration, the separation of families, the caging of children, and the imprisonment of asylum seekers”.

We will put our bodies on the line to stop Trump incarcerating children | Winnie Wong Read more

She added that she was proud to have been arrested among hundreds of others who believed that “the US is better and as a member of Congress I refuse to let this president and administration do what they are doing to children in my name”.

Facebook Twitter Pinterest Senator Elizabeth Warren cheers on demonstrators. Photograph: Jonathan Ernst/Reuters

Daily images are still emerging of distraught immigrant children separated from parents and not yet reunited, despite an executive order last week ending the policy of summarily tearing families apart and arresting the adults after anyone is caught crossing the border illegally.

In a written statement, the Capitol police said about 575 people were charged with unlawfully demonstrating inside the office building. The police said those arrested were being released after they were processed.

Winnie Wong, political adviser for the Women’s March, said the crowd’s fervor would translate into “the energy we will need to see at the ballot box in November”, when congressional control will be at stake.

Facebook Twitter Pinterest The actor Susan Sarandon, center, was among the activists protesting at the Hart office building. Photograph: J Scott Applewhite/AP

The Democratic senator Jeff Merkley of Oregon, who was one of the first to draw attention to children being held in detention camps along the border after being separated from their parents, appeared before the crowd. So did the Democrats Kirsten Gillibrand of New York and Edward Markey of Massachusetts.

“These folks are out here fighting for the core principles of our nation, and I applaud them for it,” Merkley said in an interview.

Meanwhile, hundreds more people gathered at a rally outside a federal courthouse in Brownsville, Texas, in the Rio Grande valley.

And dozens of protesters shut down a government meeting in Michigan in protest against a contract with the Immigration and Customs Enforcement (Ice) agency to house detainees at a local jail. Eight people also were arrested outside an Ice building in Portland, Oregon, that has been closed because of a round-the-clock demonstration.ARTICLE:About 100 people arrested in immigration protest at Capitol HillWashington (CNN) With her infant daughter in tow, Democratic Sen. Tammy Duckworth visited female activists in a Capitol Hill Senate building who are protesting the administration's "zero-tolerance" immigration policy

"I wanted to show my support for the folks here today," Duckworth, who gave birth to her second child in April, told CNN in an interview after she visited with protesters. "I could only imagine what it would be like to have my daughter -- my breastfeeding child -- ripped away from me the way some of these other moms' babies have been."

More than 1,000 female activists marched through Washington Thursday to protest the separation of children from their immigration parents at the US-Mexico border.

US Capitol Police arrested approximately 575 individuals with unlawfully demonstrating, including Rep. Pramila Jayapal, a Democrat from Washington.

Read MoreARTICLE:Democrats, with few options to stall Trump’s Supreme Court pick, will emphasize abortion stakesSenator Elizabeth Warren told activists at the Supreme Court Thursday she would fight the president’s nominee “with every bone in my body.”

WASHINGTON — Senate Democrats are vowing a fight for the ages to stop President Trump’s as-yet-unnamed Supreme Court pick from getting confirmed. Senator Elizabeth Warren said Thursday that she is “prepared to fight with every bone in my body.”

But with few procedural options to block Trump’s nominee, and uncertainty about whether they can even hold their caucus together, Democrats probably will have to settle for the next best option: using their fierce battle over a likely rightward shift on the high court to motivate voters in the 2018 congressional elections.

Women, especially female swing voters in suburbs, will be the targets of a relentless campaign focused on the likelihood of greater restrictions on abortion or even an outright reversal of Roe v. Wade, the 1973 Supreme Court decision that struck down abortion bans. Democrats are warning women could be “put in jail” under the reign of the future Supreme Court.

Advertisement

Justice Anthony Kennedy, who is retiring, is a moderately conservative swing justice who was pivotal in decisions enshrining gay people’s right to marry and striking down states’ attempts to limit abortion rights. His replacement could take the court sharply right on the environment, gay rights, and abortion, among other issues. Democrats think the threat could galvanize their base even more than Democratic voters’ dislike of the president.

Get This Week in Politics in your inbox: A weekly recap of the top political stories from The Globe, sent right to your email. Sign Up Thank you for signing up! Sign up for more newsletters here

“I didn’t think that our enthusiasm could get bigger, but a tempest is coming,” said Senator Chris Murphy, a Democrat from Connecticut.

Carolyn Kaster/Associated Press/file 2018 “I didn’t think that our enthusiasm could get bigger, but a tempest is coming,” said Senator Chris Murphy, a Democrat from Connecticut.

Republicans are also giddy at the prospect of facing what looks like a tough midterm election with the boost of a second Supreme Court justice under their belts.

“It’s good politics for Republicans,” said Alex Conant, a GOP political consultant who’s worked for Senator Marco Rubio. “I’d much rather have abortion be the topic this fall than Trump’s tweets.”

But Democrats think this could be a miscalculation if they are able to make the Supreme Court battle a referendum on the right to a legal abortion a few months before the election. About 70 percent of Americans oppose overturning Roe v. Wade, according to several polls from Pew and Quinnipiac. Many suburban Republicans eager to talk tax cuts and the booming economy are unlikely to benefit from a conversation about banning abortion.

Advertisement

While the Senate will be the focal point of the confirmation debate, Democrats have a better chance in the November elections of flipping the House from Republican control, and that is where the biggest impact could be.

“Having a national debate about overturning Roe v. Wade imperils Republicans in the suburban districts that are key to their chance of holding the House,” said Jesse Ferguson, a former staffer for the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee and Hillary Clinton’s presidential bid.

The battle is shaping up to be acrimonious, with many Senate Democrats still hopping mad over Senate majority leader Mitch McConnell’s move to block hearings for Barack Obama’s Supreme Court pick for nearly a year in 2016 because it was a presidential election year. Senator Ben Sasse said Wednesday that the once somber and bipartisan confirmation process has turned into “blood sport.”

MSNBC’s Rachel Maddow told Democrats on her show Wednesday night not to be “doormats” — urging them to unify as a caucus and use whatever tools necessary to block a pick.

But Democrats have few procedural tricks available. They can refuse to show up for votes, but can be compelled to return to the Senate floor under the institution’s rules. They can slow hearings, but only for so long.

Advertisement

“Ain’t gonna happen,” Senator John Cornyn of Texas, a Republican in Senate leadership, told reporters Thursday, referring to Democrats’ chances of blocking confirmation.

Democrats are painting the confirmation battle in apocalyptic terms, calling the prospect of an antiabortion conservative replacing Kennedy “terrifying” and raising the specter of women languishing in jails.

Senator Kirsten Gillibrand said “women’s lives are at risk,” with Kennedy’s departure. The New York Democrat questioned ‘‘whether we are going to be arresting women for making decisions about their bodies.’’

“So many of our fundamental rights, freedoms, and liberties — and the rule of law — are all at risk,” said former vice president Joe Biden.

Maddow raised the prospect of the court allowing states to outlaw birth control, which was legalized in 1965. “What if birth control was illegal? What would you do if birth control was illegal?” she asked on her show Wednesday.

J. Scott Applewhite/Associated Press Young activists demonstrated at the Supreme Court as President Trump prepared to choose a replacement for Justice Anthony Kennedy, on Capitol Hill in Washington on Thursday.

All sides are planning expensive advertising and e-mail blitzes in an attempt to mobilize the grass roots.

“The impact of Justice Kennedy’s announcement is enormous and terrifying — for everything from reproductive rights to health care to voting rights and beyond,” said Julie McClain Downey, a spokeswoman for Emily’s List, a group that works to elect women who support abortion rights. “The work we are doing here is imperative because it feels like our freedom depends on our success.”

The focus on Roe could have a particularly strong impact on female voters, who have driven Democratic victories in special elections in Alabama and Virginia since Trump was elected in 2016.

“Women around this country are already galvanized, they’re mobilizing politically in a way we haven’t seen in a generation,” said Senator Ed Markey of Massachusetts.

In addition to motivating their base, Democrats are hoping that stressing the importance of the historic Roe v. Wade decision could draw a handful of moderate Republicans to their side, putting pressure on Trump to pick a justice who refers to the decision as “settled law.”

Democrats hope to woo GOP Senators Susan Collins of Maine and Lisa Murkowski of Alaska, who are both in favor of abortion rights, to their side, robbing Trump of the majority he needs unless he picks someone who vows not to overturn Roe.

“This is a legacy vote,” Murphy said. “I don’t think you can say you are pro-choice if you cast a vote that will be looked upon as the one that criminalized abortion and put women in jail.”

But even if Collins and Murkowski were swayed by that argument, it’s unclear whether Democrats would hold together in opposition to a nominee who is evasive on the abortion question. A handful of Democratic senators up for reelection in red states are facing pressure to back the president’s pick no matter what.

Senator Joe Manchin of West Virginia, a Democrat who faces a tough reelection bid this year, said Thursday that he would judge the pick based on his or her qualifications and dismissed the idea that Democrats could influence the pick or delay the confirmation.

“We have very little control,” Manchin said.

Material from the Associated Press was used in this report. Liz Goodwin can be reached at elizabeth.goodwin@globe.com . Follow her on Twitter @lizcgoodwinARTICLE:Hundreds Arrested at Senate Office Building ProtestHundreds of protesters were arrested Thursday after staging a sit-in at a U.S. Senate office building in Washington to protest the Trump administration's immigration policy.

U.S. Capitol Police arrested 575 activists, mostly women, decrying President Donald Trump's "zero-tolerance" policy on admission of undocumented immigrants.

They chanted "What do we want? Free families!'' and "This is what democracy looks like,'' as they sat in the Hart Senate Office Building's atrium.

Protesters wrapped themselves in Mylar blankets, like the ones given to children separated from their families at the southern U.S. border and detained.

Democratic Senators Tammy Duckworth of Illinois, Maizi Hirono of Hawaii and Ed Markey of Massachusetts were among those who visited the protesters to lend their support.

Democratic Representative Pramila Jayapal of Washington, herself an immigrant, tweeted that she was among those arrested.

Under the zero-tolerance policy, the government has begun prosecuting all migrants caught entering the country without authorization. Trump has halted his policy of taking children from their detained parents under public pressure, but an estimated 2,000 of them are still being held, with many families saying they don't know how to locate them.

Similar protests also took place elsewhere around the country. Hundreds gathered at a rally outside a federal courthouse in Brownsville, Texas, near the U.S.-Mexico border in the Rio Grande Valley.

Dozens of people shut down a government meeting in Michigan to protest a contract with Immigration and Customs Enforcement to house detainees at a local jail.

Eight others were arrested outside an ICE building in Portland, Oregon, that has been closed because of a round-the-clock demonstration.ARTICLE:Anti-ICE Protest: Women Arrested in Senate Building While Protesting Donald Trump’s Immigration PolicyARTICLE:Protesters jam Senate office building to protest Trump 'zero tolerance' policyHundreds of women gathered in the lobby of a Senate office building Thursday to protest the Trump administration’s “zero tolerance” immigration policy.

The protesters, who came from all over the country, demanded an end to the detention of families illegally crossing the southern border, as well as the abolishment of ICE.

ADVERTISEMENT

Many were clad in silver space blankets, and shirts with slogans like “Deport Trump” and “I really do care,” a parody of the jacketwore on her first visit to detained children in Texas.

”Our goal is to bring hope and maybe a ray of light and some inspiration in a time that’s been really dark, and let the people at the border know that they are not alone and that we see them,” said a protester named Cecelia.

She declined to give her last name, but said she traveled from Philadelphia for the demonstration.

The group met at Freedom Plaza in downtown Washington, D.C. on Thursday morning. They first marched to the Department of Justice, and then to the Hart Senate Office Building.

The crowd sat in the Hart atrium, singing: “We’re going to rise like the water, gonna shut detentions down.”

The protesters were joined in Hart by various Democratic lawmakers, including Sens. Kirsten Gillibrand Kirsten Elizabeth GillibrandWhen Democrats cry 'Abolish ICE,' they really mean 'abolish borders' The animating forces behind the Democratic Party are true, radical leftists Sen. Sanders calls for restructuring ICE as part of immigration overhaul MORE (N.Y.), Ed Markey Edward (Ed) John MarkeyLawmakers press Trump admin for list of migrant kids separated from families Dem lawmakers join nationwide protests against Trump immigration policies Protesters jam Senate office building to protest Trump 'zero tolerance' policy MORE (Mass.), Elizabeth Warren Elizabeth Ann WarrenWhen Democrats cry 'Abolish ICE,' they really mean 'abolish borders' CVS Health CEO 'surprised' by Azar's comments on drug prices Dem fires back at White House: Don't talk to me until you reunite separated families MORE (Mass.), Richard Blumenthal (Conn.) and Tammy Duckworth Ladda (Tammy) Tammy DuckworthLawmakers press Trump admin for list of migrant kids separated from families The Hill's Morning Report — Sponsored by Better Medicare Alliance — Protests and anger: Washington in turmoil as elections near Ocasio-Cortez responds to Dem senator who said policies 'too far to the left' don't win in Midwest MORE (Ill.), who arrived holding her infant.

.@SenDuckworth says she’s here to support the protesters here demanding an end to immigrant family separation and detention. #Immigration #WomenDisobey #dc pic.twitter.com/vKZDodj8b0 — Marissa J. Lang (@Marissa_Jae) June 28, 2018

Capitol Police said they arrested 575 people at the protest, including Rep. Pramila Jayapal Pramila JayapalProgressives poised to shape agenda if Dems take back House Ex-ICE director: It should be an 'abolish Trump' movement, not an 'abolish ICE' movement Dem generation gap widens MORE (D-Wash.).

Caroline Gardner contributed



ARTICLE:Altering Human Genetics Through VaccinationJon Rappoport, Guest

Waking Times

The National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID) has launched efforts to create a vaccine that would protect people from most flu strains, all at once, with a single shot.

Over the years, I’ve written many articles refuting claims that vaccines are safe and effective, but we’ll put all that aside for the moment and follow the bouncing ball.

Massachusetts Senator and big spender, Ed Markey, has introduced a bill that would shovel no less than a billion dollars toward the universal flu-vaccine project.

Here is a sentence from an NIAID press release that mentions one of several research approaches:

“NIAID Vaccine Research Center scientists have initiated Phase 1/2 studies of a universal flu vaccine strategy that includes an investigational DNA-based vaccine (called a DNA ‘prime’)…”

This is quite troubling, if you know what the phrase “DNA vaccine” means. It refers to what the experts are touting as the next generation of immunizations.

Instead of injecting a piece of a virus into a person, in order to stimulate the immune system, synthesized genes would be shot into the body. This isn’t traditional vaccination anymore. It’s gene therapy.

In any such method, where genes are edited, deleted, added, no matter what the pros say, there are always “unintended consequences,” to use their polite phrase. The ripple effects scramble the genetic structure in numerous unknown ways.

Here is the inconvenient truth about DNA vaccines—

They will permanently alter your DNA

The reference is the New York Times, 3/15/15, “Protection Without a Vaccine.” It describes the frontier of research—the use of synthetic genes to “protect against disease,” while changing the genetic makeup of humans. This is not science fiction:

“By delivering synthetic genes into the muscles of the [experimental] monkeys, the scientists are essentially re-engineering the animals to resist disease.”

“’The sky’s the limit,’ said Michael Farzan, an immunologist at Scripps and lead author of the new study.”

“The first human trial based on this strategy — called immunoprophylaxis by gene transfer, or I.G.T. — is underway, and several new ones are planned.” [That was three years ago.]

“I.G.T. is altogether different from traditional vaccination. It is instead a form of gene therapy. Scientists isolate the genes that produce powerful antibodies against certain diseases and then synthesize artificial versions. The genes are placed into viruses and injected into human tissue, usually muscle.”

Here is the punchline: “The viruses invade human cells with their DNA payloads, and the synthetic gene is incorporated into the recipient’s own DNA. If all goes well, the new genes instruct the cells to begin manufacturing powerful antibodies.”

Read that again: “the synthetic gene is incorporated into the recipient’s own DNA.”

Alteration of the human genetic makeup.

Not just a “visit.” Permanent residence. And once a person’s DNA is changed, he will live with that change—and all the ripple effects in his genetic makeup—for the rest of his life.

The Times article taps Dr. David Baltimore for an opinion:

“Still, Dr. Baltimore says that he envisions that some people might be leery of a vaccination strategy that means altering their own DNA, even if it prevents a potentially fatal disease.”

Yes, some people might be leery. If they have two or three working brain cells.

This is genetic roulette with a loaded gun. Anyone and everyone on Earth injected with a DNA vaccine will undergo permanent and unknown genetic changes…

And the further implications are clear. Vaccines can be used as a cover for the injections of any and all genes, whose actual purpose is re-engineering humans in far-reaching ways.

The emergence of this Frankenstein technology is paralleled by a shrill push to mandate vaccines, across the board, for both children and adults. The pressure and propaganda are planet-wide.

The freedom and the right to refuse vaccines has always been vital. It is more vital than ever now.

It means the right to preserve your inherent DNA.

About the Author

Jon Rappoport is the author of three explosive collections, THE MATRIX REVEALED, EXIT FROM THE MATRIX, and POWER OUTSIDE THE MATRIX, Jon was a candidate for a US Congressional seat in the 29thDistrict of California. He maintains a consulting practice for private clients, the purpose of which is the expansion of personal creative power. Nominated for a Pulitzer Prize, he has worked as an investigative reporter for 30 years, writing articles on politics, medicine, and health for CBS Healthwatch, LA Weekly, Spin Magazine, Stern, and other newspapers and magazines in the US and Europe. Jon has delivered lectures and seminars on global politics, health, logic, and creative power to audiences around the world. You can sign up for his free emails at NoMoreFakeNews.com or OutsideTheRealityMachine.

(To read about Jon’s mega-collection, Exit From The Matrix, click here.)

This article (Altering Human Genetics Through Vaccination) was originally created and published by Jon Rappaport’s Blog and is re-posted here with permission.ARTICLE:Police arrest 575 at Capitol Hill immigration protestsJune 28 (UPI) -- WASHINGTON -- Police arrested 575 women staging a sit-in at the Senate office building Thursday demanding an end to the Trump administration's zero-tolerance policy toward undocumented immigrants.

The protest there and at the Justice Department was part of a day of civil disobedience organized by Women's March members leading up to a larger rally planned by them and other groups Saturday.

Some 1,000 protesters circled the Department of Justice as they chanted "DOJ Disobey" and "We Care." They paused for a moment of silence for the migrant children they said were unaccounted for.

Political and public outcry against the administration's policy of separating parents from children upon arrest prompted President Donald Trump to sign an executive order last week saying parents and children would be kept together in detention. Administration officials have offered different explanations for how the policy was being implemented, and how and when all approximately 2,300 children would be reunited with parents.

The executive order has "been signed but what are the actions that are being taken?" said Diane Dresdner, 60, who drove from Northern Virginia to help direct the protesters. "They're separating parents from children, they're also separating brothers from sisters and young siblings from older siblings. That's horrific. Horrific."

Laura Divito of Long Island, N.Y., said, "I don't believe anything that this particular president is saying and that's because of his history of constant lying."

"I don't know what kind of country I'm living in anymore because this is not the America that I know," she said. "What America has become is not the America I grew up with."

For others, however, the Trump administration's policies served to highlight an existing problem.

"Everyone keeps saying, 'This isn't the America that I know,' but I mean, this is," said Jill Manrique, 33, of Skokie, Ill. Manrique said she was compelled to participate partially because of her Mexican and Jewish heritage.

"I think it's important to not pretend America's this place that didn't do this before and that hasn't treated people like garbage, because it has," she added. "And now it's just time for everyone to wake up and change it."

After the Department of Justice protests, many of the women moved on to Capitol Hill, where they staged a sit-in at the Hart Office Building.

Eva Malecki, communications director for Capitol Police, said the department charged about 575 people with unlawfully demonstrating. She said they were being processed on the scene before being released.

Democratic Sens. Tammy Duckworth of Illinois, Ed Markey of Massachusetts, Mazie Hirono of Hawaii, Kirsten Gillibrand of New York and Richard Blumenthal of Connecticut visited the protesters to show their support.

Duckworth, who had her new baby daughter in tow, told CNN "I wanted to show my support for the folks here today ... I could only imagine what it would be like to have my daughter -- my breastfeeding child -- ripped away from me the way some of these other moms' babies have been."

The protest was peaceful, CNN reported.

It wasn't the only immigration-related protest held in the country Thursday. In Portland, Ore., Department of Homeland Security officers in riot gear removed protesters camping out at an Immigration and Customs Enforcement facility, KOIN-TV reported. Officers dismantled the protesters' tens, but more than 100 demonstrators remained outside the ICE building.

Police arrested and later released at least eight people in the Oregon protest.

Rob Sperling of the Federal Protective Service told KOIN-TV that though there was some screaming, "nothing was violent or anything like that" and it actually remained "very calm and peaceful."

Farther south, hundreds of people gathered in a protest at the federal courthouse in Brownsville, Texas, the American Civil Liberties Union of Texas, which organized the demonstration told Houston Public Media.

Meanwhile, first lady Melania Trump made another trip to the border Thursday to visit a temporary detention facility for children and adults in Arizona.

"I want to thank you for all your hard work that you do," she told Border Protection Commissioner Kevin McAleenan. "And I know how dangerous and difficult your daily jobs are. I really appreciate all you do on behalf of the country ... I'm here to support you and give my help, whatever I can for behalf of the children and the families. Thank you for having me."

McAleenan said 1,100 unaccompanied children entered at the Arizona ports of entry since October 2017, including a 6-year-old boy left alone near Luke Air Force Base with a Coke bottle in hand.

"People have to understand the dangers of the desert, of the heat, of the violence that exists out there," McAleenan said. "This is something that our people encounter on a daily basis."

Crossing the border illegally is a misdemeanor under federal law, and for a person who has already been deported once it's a low-level felony, but the Trump administration's zero-tolerance policy announced in April prosecutes both with no exceptions even if a person requests asylum.

Since the day he announced his presidential campaign, Trump has made securing the southern border a cornerstone of his presidency. He has used examples of violent crimes committed by undocumented immigrations to shore up support for a border wall and his zero-tolerance policies.

"I always hear that -- 'Oh no, the [undocumented immigration] population is safer than the people that live in the country.' You've heard that, fellows, right? And I say is that possible? The answer is it is not true. You hear like they are better people than what we have, than our citizens, it is not true," he said last week.

Trump signed an executive order last week to end the policy of separating immigrant children from their families after national outcry, replacing it with a policy of family detention. That left officials scrambling to figure out how to detain families together until Monday when border officials temporarily stopped referring most immigrant families for prosecution.

A federal judge in California ordered Tuesday that immigrant children separated from their families at the U.S.-Mexican border must be reunited within 30 days -- and children under 5 within 14 days based on an ACLU suit. The Department of Health and Human Services estimated more than 2,000 children were still in immigration detention centers separate from their parents, at that time.ARTICLE:Sen. Tammy Duckworth, Baby in Arms, Joins Immigration Protests on Capitol HillSen. Tammy Duckworth (D-IL), who recently gave birth, brought her infant daughter as she joined a large demonstration on Capitol Hill on Thursday targeting the Trump administration’s immigration policies.

The protesters were drawing attention to the separation of families seeking asylum at the southern border, a practice that was temporarily halted by an executive order from President Donald Trump.

“I could only imagine what it would be like to have my daughter—my breastfeeding child—ripped away from me the way some of these other moms’ babies have been,” Duckworth said, referring to the Trump administration’s “zero tolerance” policy, which has led to the separation of immigrant families who illegally cross the southern border.

Other Democratic senators also attended the protest, including Sens. Jeff Merkley (D-OR), Kirsten Gillibrand (D-NY), and Ed Markey (D-MA).

Demonstrators were wearing foil to represent the foil-like sleeping bags that children inside the detention facilities were using.

“We have responsibilities under international treaties to treat people with respect when they seek asylum. We have national laws that require it,” Merkley told The Daily Beast.

The Oregon Democrat traveled to southern Texas recently to call attention to the Trump administration policy, which has spurred bipartisan opposition outrage but has yet to lead to a negotiated solution.

Trump’s executive order will likely be subject to legal challenges, and Senate Republicans are still cobbling together a proposal that would permanently end the separation of families while also increasing the number of immigration judges in order to expedite asylum cases. But that measure has yet to attract Democratic support, which is necessary in order to clear the 60-vote threshold. The House failed to pass two conservative immigration bills this week and last week that would have addressed the family-separation issue.

Capitol Police said 575 people were arrested from the Hart building for unlawfully demonstrating. Rep. Pramila Jayapal (D-WA), a progressive who has been outspoken on immigration issues, was among those arrested. The protest took place in the atrium of the Hart Senate office building, where many senators’ personal offices are located.ARTICLE:Police arrest hundreds during immigration protest at capitolWASHINGTON — With her infant daughter in tow, Democratic Sen. Tammy Duckworth visited female activists in a Capitol Hill Senate building who are protesting the administration’s “zero-tolerance” immigration policy

“I wanted to show my support for the folks here today,” Duckworth, who gave birth to her second child in April, told CNN in an interview after she visited with protesters. “I could only imagine what it would be like to have my daughter — my breastfeeding child — ripped away from me the way some of these other moms’ babies have been.”

More than 1,000 female activists marched through Washington Thursday to protest the separation of children from their immigration parents at the US-Mexico border.

US Capitol Police arrested approximately 575 individuals with unlawfully demonstrating, including Rep. Pramila Jayapal, a Democrat from Washington.

The arrests have been peaceful so far, with the protesters not arguing with Capitol police officers during arrests and no cuffs being put on them.

Other Democratic senators — including Ed Markey of Massachusetts, Mazie Hirono of Hawaii, Kirsten Gillibrand of New York and Richard Blumenthal of Connecticut — also visited the protesters to support their efforts.

The protestors chanted “abolish ICE” as well as “where are the children?” as well as other chants that are hard to hear within the building.

The activists sat on the floor of the Senate building with emergency blankets to demand Congress act to end the Trump administration policies that criminalize and detain undocumented immigrants and separates their children from them.

Congress is set to leave town for a week-long recess without passing any legislation to address the situation at the US border. On Wednesday, the House failed to pass legislation that would have address in part several high-profile immigration-related policies including border wall funding and an eventual pathway to citizenship for recipients of the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program.

In an executive order last week, President Donald Trump said his administration was seeking more authority to detain families together until the end of their immigration proceedings.

The order instructs federal agencies — notably the Department of Defense — to prepare facilities to house the potentially thousands of families who will be detained.ARTICLE:Capitol Police Arrest 575 People Protesting Trump Immigration Policies At Senate BuildingThe Capitol Police charged approximately 575 people with unlawfully demonstrating in the atrium of the Hart Senate Building. They are being processed on the scene and then released.

Hundreds of women already arrested demanding an end to family detention. We’re still singing for justice. #abolishICE pic.twitter.com/gsFPvnb0rn — Women's March (@womensmarch) June 28, 2018

More than a thousand female protesters, joined by Democratic senators, marched two miles down Pennsylvania Avenue to protest the Trump Administration's family detention and separation policies, and demanded the abolishment of Immigration and Customs Enforcement, ABC reports. The walk ended in the Hart Senate building, where Capitol Police arrested many of them in response to an act of civil disobedience.

Chanting "WE CARE" and "ABOLISH ICE," the protesters are demanding Congress act to end Trump's policies that criminalize and detain undocumented immigrants and separate detained families. ICE is a common acronym for the U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement agency.

Women are being arrested by the hundreds in Congress demanding an end to the criminalization of immigrants. #EndFamilyDetention #AbolishICE pic.twitter.com/ns5KC4FRlV — Women's March (@womensmarch) June 28, 2018

Women's March organizers were involved in today's action, along with local D.C. advocacy groups. The rally started in Freedom Plaza at around 11 a.m and proceeded down Pennsylvania Avenue until participants reached the Capitol. Once they reached the building, women sat on the ground and waited to be carted off. Police began arresting them in groups.

More than 1,000 women are in DC today to risk arrest standing up to Trump’s racist agenda. We are here to decriminalize immigrants, #AbolishICE, and #EndFamilyDetention. Photo by @KishaBari pic.twitter.com/BbJ4XtErZ2 — Women's March (@womensmarch) June 28, 2018

Protesters walked around wearing mylar blankets similar to those being handed out to immigrant children detained and separated from their families.

Susan Sarandon front and center now on a women’s march down Pennsylvania Avenue to the Capitol. More on the ongoing event from @Marissa_Jae: https://t.co/2wPPLkg4Rz pic.twitter.com/pyFSg572jU — Dan Zak (@MrDanZak) June 28, 2018

“Women are outraged at the separation of families,” said Linda Sarsour, one of last year's Women’s March Organizer. “We are outraged of all the things that are unfolding in our country."

Foil blankets are piling up as women are arrested here at the Senate. @RepJayapal joined us to demand an end to immigrant detention. Photo credit @KishaBari pic.twitter.com/bEe7pi4Z2U — Women's March (@womensmarch) June 28, 2018

Democratic Sens. Ed Markey of Massachusetts, Mazie Hirono of Hawaii, Kirsten Gillibrand of New York and Richard Blumenthal of Connecticut visited the protesters to support their efforts. Sen. Tammy Duckworth was spotted in her wheelchair with her daughter in her lap.

#WomenDisobey: Protesters slowly working their way into the Hart Senate building for a series of arrest actions.



Everyone (myself included) taking a break in the cool atrium after the 2-mile walk, the midday sun is intense. pic.twitter.com/Kl7WLxCKWF — Alejandro Alvarez (@aletweetsnews) June 28, 2018

"We are here to say we’re ready to sacrifice and we’re ready to leave our jobs, leave our families to come and take this act of civil disobedience here,” she said.

The actress Susan Sarandon made an appearance at the march, and she was arrested in the second group of protesters in the Hart Building, where 50 senators have their offices, according to Washington Post reporter Marissa Lang.

#WomenDisobey: Arrests continuing here in the Hart building, it’s been 40 minutes and police have only led away about a quarter of the crowd. pic.twitter.com/kCy6AtI48n — Alejandro Alvarez (@aletweetsnews) June 28, 2018

The march began near the Department of Justice, where speakers rallied supporters by sharing their experiences with immigration and calling for action. Before the march, protesters were split into four groups to review the procedures if arrested.

Congresswoman Sheila Jackson Lee of Texas called for ongoing mobilization beyond Thursday's protest. “This is not a day event,” Lee told a crowd of protesters. “This is an everyday event.”

People showed their support through handmade signs, including one that read “Don’t have a heart of I.C.E.” Others marked “We Care” on their palms. Still other protesters wore jackets with “I really care. Do you?” painted in white on their backs, a reaction to the controversy that followed First Lady Melania Trump’s trip to the southwest to visit detained children. As she boarded a plane in Washington D.C, photographers could clearly read the message "I really don't care. Do u?" on the back of her jacket, which reportedly retails from Zara for $39. While the First Lady took the jacket off before exiting the plane, it was widely seen as an inappropriate choice of clothing.

As women protested downstairs, senators began coming down to shake their hands and say thank you.ARTICLE:King wins panel approval despite Democrats' oppositionKing wins panel approval despite Democrats' opposition

With help from Tanya Snyder and Brianna Gurciullo

TAG, YOU’RE IT: The Senate Commerce Committee approved Heidi King's nomination to lead NHTSA on a razor-thin, party-line vote Wednesday after it was initially scuttled last month due to fears of low Republican attendance. Ranking member Bill Nelson (D-Fla.) said he was voting no because King "lacks the fire in the belly to protect consumers from something which is killing" people — meaning, defective Takata airbags. Chairman John Thune (R-S.D.) told reporters afterward he thought the unanimous Democratic opposition was “driven by Nelson” and that other Democrats “fell in line behind him.” Sen. Ed Markey (D-Mass.), though, cited a different reason for voting no: fuel economy standards, which he said King wants to roll back.

Story Continued Below

What’s next: King could be the next nominee to sit in the purgatory that's plaguing FTA nominee Thelma Drake — committee-approved but awaiting a vote by the full Senate. Calendar issues are undoubtedly a factor, but Democratic opposition could continue to dog King. No senator has yet copped to putting a hold on her confirmation on the floor, but we’ll be polling members to find out what’s in store.

FINANCE TO KEEP LOW PROFILE ON FAA BILL: The Senate Finance Committee could hold a markup of its own on the FAA bill’s tax title, but it probably won’t — at least according to a Commerce Committee staffer on Wednesday. He said Finance will probably bring its tax title as an amendment once the bill hits the floor. Commerce leaders are hotlining the FAA bill (S. 1405 (115)) to clear up any issues that could bog down passage and squeeze it into as little time as possible on the Senate floor.

Note: Now that the Senate’s top priority is confirming a new Supreme Court justice before the midterms, floor time is at an all-time premium.

IT’S THURSDAY: Thanks for tuning in to POLITICO’s Morning Transportation, your daily tipsheet on all things trains, planes, automobiles and ports. Stephanie is your driver. Send tips, scoops and song requests to @Steph_Beasley or sbeasley@politico.com.

In the town where I was born / Lived a man who sailed to sea / And he told us of his life / In the land of submarines / So we sailed up to the sun / Till we found a sea of green / And we lived beneath the waves / In our yellow submarine

LISTEN HERE: Follow MT’s playlist on Spotify. What better way to start your day than with songs (picked by us and readers) about roads, rails, rivers and runways?

POLITICO will be reporting from inside the World Gas Conference June 25-29. Sign up now for our pop-up conference newsletter to receive on-the-ground insights and information every afternoon from POLITICO Pro Energy Editor Matt Daily.

NOT-SO-HAPPY ANNIVERSARY: Wednesday marked one year since the House Energy and Commerce Digital Commerce and Consumer Protection Subcommittee held the first hearing on its self-driving car bill (H.R. 3388 (115)), which the full committee unanimously approved and then sailed through a voice vote on the House floor — only to be met with months of stagnation in the Senate. “We’re running out of time,” Subcommittee Chairman Bob Latta (R-Ohio) told our Tanya Snyder. “I’m very concerned that if we don’t get this done, we’ll have this patchwork [of state regulations] and we’re going to have companies from other countries developing this technology and it won’t be here.” He also said the uptick in traffic deaths compels them to act.

Kick in the pants: “You look at an industry that’s just a hair under a trillion dollars, we move a piece of legislation of this magnitude out with bipartisanship with a unanimous vote, I think that speaks volumes,” Latta said. He and ranking member Jan Schakowsky (D-Ill.) wrote an op-ed recently and have put out several press releases as the anniversary approached urging the Senate to act.

SETTING THEIR SIGHTS A LITTLE LOWER: Safety groups have pressed the Senate Commerce Committee to include semi-autonomous vehicles in its driverless car bill, and it seems they’re listening. Staffers, if not members, are discussing the inclusion of Level 2 vehicles in the bill — which can steer, accelerate and brake themselves but leave drivers to do the more sophisticated tasks — in the wake of high-profile crashes involving Tesla’s Autopilot. In both of those crashes, the people behind the wheel apparently overestimated the car's abilities and failed to take over the controls when prompted. Tanya has more for Pros.

SECURITY BILLS CLEAR COMMITTEE: The Senate Commerce Committee approved several transportation security bills by voice vote Wednesday. One (S. 3094 (115)) would specify that the Coast Guard can only require the use of biometric readers for transportation worker ID cards after it submits an assessment of the program. Another bill (H.R. 4467 (115)) would require the Federal Air Marshal Service to use risk-based strategies when allocating resources for international and domestic flight coverage. And another (H.R. 4559 (115)) would direct TSA to review improving global aviation security standards, including cybersecurity standards, across the global aviation system.

SUMMER, SUMMER, SUMMER TIME: TSA expects to see a surge in airport travel volumes in the lead up to the July Fourth holiday, agency chief David Pekoske told reporters Wednesday. He said 2.6 million travelers are expected to go through security checkpoints this Friday alone. “We expect that this coming Friday will potentially be one of the busiest days ever in TSA history in terms of passenger throughput,” he said. The spike will occur as the agency also works with international airports to implement new rules requiring additional screening of powders in carry-on bags, starting on Saturday. The procedures, which include asking passengers to remove food items and other clutter from bags, are already in effect domestically.

The impact: Pekoske said during normal travel periods, the majority of PreCheck passengers get through checkpoints within 10 minutes and the bulk of regular travelers typically wait no more than 20 minutes. But it can increase to 45 or 60 minutes when lanes are pushed to capacity, he said. He advised travelers to arrive early.

More ch-ch-changes: Pekoske also noted that an interim final rule from TSA and Customs and Border Protection that requires advanced screening of all air cargo entering the U.S. went into effect earlier this month. The new policy “allows us to do a process quite similar actually to what we do with passengers when passengers buy a ticket,” he said. “[W]e check passengers against our databases and assign risk based on those results. We’re doing the very same thing for cargo.”

The land of tomorrow: TSA and CBP also are in discussions about merging PreCheck and Global Entry and streamlining enrollment for “trusted travelers,” Pekoske said. But he added that the process could take a year or more to complete.

LET ME EXPLAIN: Delta Air Lines caught some flak last week for not pressing the Trump administration to avoid using its planes to carry separated migrant children — which set Delta apart from American, United and other airlines. Delta did release a statement after President Donald Trump issued an executive order on the matter, saying: “Recent reports of families being separated are disheartening and do not align with Delta’s core values.” Defending his company Wednesday during a National Press Club event, Delta CEO Ed Bastian said that “many of the actions that were interpreted as separating” families at the time were actually actions to fly “kids to reunite [them] with families.” He added that “the story got out before the facts got out,” and Delta wanted to “understand the facts” before making a statement.

THE ‘NANNY DOGS’: A pit bull owner has launched a petition on the Care2 website against Delta’s impending restrictions on service animals, including a ban on pit bulls and "bully" breeds. “As more people become aware that we should be blaming the deed, not the breed, the trend worldwide has been to end bans against certain dogs,” Kelsey Bourgeois, the author of the petition, said. “Apparently Delta did not get the memo.” Delta is one of several airlines implementing new rules in the wake of what it says has been an uptick in animal-related attacks and other incidents on flights. Delta’s new service animal rules go into effect July 10. The petition currently has more than 26,000 signatures.

STATE OF AIR TRAVEL: A new Morning Consult travel report shows that the majority of Americans still prefer to get around in their cars, but when they do choose to fly, most consider Southwest, American, Delta and United to be the top choices. And Southwest enjoys the most favorable opinions, overall. Other findings of note were that 74 percent of people polled considered ticket cost the most important factor when mulling air travel and also that costs for premium services outweighed airline preferences when it came to choosing a carrier.

THE AUTOBAHN:

— "Blind pedestrians sue the city to improve crosswalk safety." The New York Times.

— “Delta CEO looks to Asia, Europe for revenue growth.” USA Today.

— “Facebook ends Aquila internet drone project.” The Drive.

— “Boston braces for robo-taxis to make downtown traffic even worse.” Bloomberg.

— “The elevated era.” Curbed New York.

THE COUNTDOWN: DOT appropriations run out in 95 days. The FAA reauthorization expires in 95 days. Highway and transit policy is up for renewal in 826 days.ARTICLE:Effort To Save Net Neutrality Via Congressional Review Act Appears Stuck In NeutralEfforts to reverse the FCC's historically unpopular attack on net neutrality using the Congressional Review Act (CRA) appear stuck in neutral.

The CRA lets Congress reverse a regulatory action with a simply majority vote in the Senate and the House (which is how the GOP successfully killed FCC privacy protections last year). And while the Senate voted 52 to 47 back in May to reverse the FCC's attack on net neutrality, companion efforts to set up a similar vote in the House don't appear to be gaining much traction as the clock continues to tick. A discharge petition needs 218 votes to even see floor time, and another 218 votes to pass the measure.

But so far, the petition only currently has 172 likely votes, all Democrats:

The House #NetNeutrality discharge petition is at 172 signatures. We’re 46 away from being able to force a vote on the resolution to restore the Open Internet Order. Has your representative signed the petition to #SaveTheInternet? Check here: https://t.co/zKI7sxSwGj — Ed Markey (@SenMarkey) June 26, 2018

Again, not a single Republican in the House has signaled any interest in saving net neutrality. As we've long noted, the quest for a healthy internet free from anti-competitive meddling by telecom monopolies has long been idiotically framed as a partisan issue despite broad, bipartisan consumer support. ISPs and their numerous political proxy organizations have long enjoyed using rhetoric that only further fuels these divisions (derailing real consensus) by conflating meaningful consumer protections with a "government takeover of the internet," ideas that are happily parroted by many ISP cash-loving DC lawmakers.

Undaunted, net neutrality activists held an advocacy day yesterday trying to drum up some additional support among lawmakers among a clearly debate-fatigued public. Another net neutrality group, Fight for the Future, has constructed this page to track which lawmakers haven't signed on, while making it easy to contact those that haven't.

That said, this effort was always an uphill climb. Even if the CRA vote succeeded in the House, it would have to avoid a veto by Trump. Many activists I've spoken to believe a vote in both Houses would appeal to Trump's "populist" streak forcing him to bend to the whims of public consensus. But given Trump's version of populism tends to be as authentic as a Hollywood Wild West set and as consistent as a brush fire, that prediction always seemed a tad optimistic. Still, stranger things have happened, so maintaining hope in the face of this level of corruption isn't entirely outrageous.

That said, the best path forward for reversing the repeal is two fold. One, there remains a notable chance that the courts see the FCC's fraud-riddled net neutrality repeal as the blatant, facts-optional nonsense it actually is, and reverses it for being an "arbitrary and capricious" abuse of procedural norms and the FCC's obligation to represent the public. If that doesn't work, there's always voting in the the midterms and thereafter for a new breed of lawmakers that don't mindlessly place ISP campaign contributions above the welfare of the public, the internet, and genuine, healthy competition.ARTICLE:Good news for INCUMBENTS — ‘RED FLAG’ gun bill heads to BAKER’s desk — WARREN, KENNEDY to rally against family separationsGood news for INCUMBENTS — ‘RED FLAG’ gun bill heads to BAKER’s desk — WARREN, KENNEDY to rally against family separations

By Lauren Dezenski (ldezenski@politico.com; @LaurenDezenski) with Brent D. Griffiths (bgriffiths@politico.com; @BrentGriffiths)

GOOD MORNING, MASSACHUSETTS.

Story Continued Below

PROGRAMMING NOTE — The Massachusetts Playbook will be in the highly capable hands of Stephanie Murray and Brent Griffiths next week while I head out of town on vacation. Send them your scoops, tips, and takes posthaste to smurray@politico.com and bgriffiths@politico.com and I look forward my well-rested return to your inbox on July 9.

SO FAR THIS YEAR, IT’S GOOD TO BE AN INCUMBENT — We’re approaching the dog-days of the summer campaign season, yet a key tenet has held fast throughout the primary: Gov. Charlie Baker is extremely popular. Meanwhile, his challengers — and challenges to incumbents across the board — continue to struggle to break through to voters.

New polling shows that Baker is even more popular among Democrats. The poll, conducted by MassINC Polling Group and WBUR shows that Baker’s favorable rating among Democratic primary voters, at 68 percent, is slightly higher than his favorable rating among Republican primary voters at 66 percent.

As MassINC pollster Steve Koczela put it recently , it’s “not out of the question Charlie Baker would win a statewide Democratic primary in MA.”

Another key data point: Up and down the ticket, challengers to incumbents are struggling to get traction. In the Democratic primary matchup between Bob Massie and Jay Gonzalez, 61 percent of voters remain undecided, while just 16 percent support Gonzalez and 13 percent support Massie.

Sen. Elizabeth Warren remains incredibly popular, though just among Democrats. The senior senator has a 79 percent favorability among Democratic primary voters, compared to an 11 percent favorability among Republican primary voters.

Among Republican primary voters, 48 percent are still undecided when it comes to her potential opponents. Geoff Diehl has an edge with 23 percent support compared to Beth Lindstrom’s 13 percent and John Kingston’s 12 percent.

In the most closely watched (and admittedly somewhat inside-baseball) race for secretary of state in a generation, more than 20 years of incumbency are proving to be a boon to Secretary of State Bill Galvin. Despite an aggressive challenge (and Democratic state convention endorsement win) by Boston City Councilor Josh Zakim, Galvin currently has 46 percent support among Democratic primary voters to Zakim’s 17 percent.

Have a tip, story, suggestion, birthday, anniversary, new job, or any other nugget for the Playbook? Get in touch: ldezenski@politico.com.

TODAY — Boston Mayor Martin Walsh and Police Commissioner William Evans hold press conference about Fourth of July public safety — Southcoast Health awards Rep. Joe Kennedy III as a “Hero of Health” at the Charlton Memorial Hospital in Fall River — Centro Presente, an immigrant advocacy organization, plans to protest on the State House steps to condemn human rights violations at the border and US military involvement in central America. Meanwhile, another immigration protest is taking place this weekend — and drawing the likes of Sen. Elizabeth Warren and Rep. Joe Kennedy III. They plan to attend a rally against family separation on Saturday, set to kick off at Boston City Hall and march to the Boston Common just before noon.

DATELINE BEACON HILL —

– “Gov. Charlie Baker signs $15 minimum wage, paid family leave into law,” by Shira Schoenberg, MassLive.com: “A new mother in Massachusetts will get paid time off to care for her baby, beginning in 2021. A son will get paid time off to care for his ailing parent. A fast food worker will earn at least $15 an hour by 2023. Gov. Charlie Baker on Thursday signed into law a bill that will reshape the state's workplaces. ”

– “How progressives and businesses made an unlikely deal on family leave,” by Shirley Leung, Boston Globe: “The progressives and key business groups began meeting in November in a conference room overlooking the Common at the Massachusetts Business Roundtable. Each side had four negotiators. There were ground rules, chief among them: no media leaks. In other words, if there was a policy disagreement, no negotiating in the press. They needed to trust each other. ”

– “Massachusetts Legislature sends 'red flag' gun bill to Gov. Charlie Baker,” by Shira Schoenberg, MassLive.com: “The Massachusetts Legislature on Thursday sent Gov. Charlie Baker a bill that would allow a family or household member to petition a judge to confiscate someone's gun if the person poses a danger to themselves or others. ‘This bill, when it's signed into law, will save lives, and that's what it's really all about," said Rep. David Linsky, D-Natick, who sponsored an earlier version of the bill. ”

– “Hearing in suit against Rosenberg coming up,” by MJ Tidwell, Amherst Bulletin: “A hearing to decide whether to reveal the name of the anonymous plaintiff who has leveled a lawsuit at former Senate President Stanley Rosenberg and his husband Bryon Hefner will reconvene on July 11. The civil lawsuit alleges that Rosenberg, 68, “knew or was aware” that Hefner, 31, posed a risk to individuals in the Massachusetts Statehouse and that Rosenberg and Hefner had an agreement or understanding allowing Hefner access to those individuals, ‘with whom Defendant Hefner could engage in unwanted sexual touching. ’”

– “Gov. Charlie Baker extends housing assistance for families displaced by Hurricane Maria,” by Shannon Young, MassLive.com: “Gov. Charlie Baker will extend disaster relief housing for some families who relocated to Massachusetts after Hurricane Maria ravaged Puerto Rico last fall, officials confirmed Thursday. With Federal Emergency Management and Red Cross shelter aid set to end Saturday, Baker spokesman Brendan Moss said the governor will allow evacuees with children to utilize disaster relief housing supports for another month. ”

– “Massachusetts will start FY19 without permanent budget,” by Shira Schoenberg, MassLive.com: “Massachusetts will start the next fiscal year without a permanent budget in place, after lawmakers were unable to reach an agreement in time. The 2019 fiscal year begins July 1, which is Sunday. ”

– “Citing 'full' plate, Massachusetts oversight panel isn't touching State Police scandals,” by Gintautas Dumcius, MassLive.com: “A day after three state troopers were charged with embezzling public funds, Massachusetts senators who sit on an oversight panel said they don't plan on taking a look into the troubled law enforcement agency. State Sen. Kathleen O'Connor Ives, chair of the Senate Post Audit and Oversight Committee , said her panel has its ‘plate full. ’”

DATELINE DC —

– “McGovern’s Rise Could Mean Double the Influence for Western Mass…,” by Matt Szafranski, Western Massachusetts Politics & Insight: “For some time now, the punditocracy has given Democrats an edge in the race for the US House of Representatives this year. For Western Massachusetts that would elevate Springfield Congressman Richard Neal to chairman of Ways & Means. He may not become the only rep for Western Massachusetts with new clout next year. ”

“Political internships surge in the age of Trump,” by James Sullivan, Boston Globe: “Most members of the state’s solidly Democratic congressional delegation have seen a surge in prospective interns, as the Trump administration moves through its second year of governance … The offices of Representatives Joe Kennedy III, Seth Moulton, Jim McGovern, and Bill Keating all reported a rise in applications, as did that of Senator Elizabeth Warren. A spokeswoman for Senator Ed Markey said his office has fielded “double if not triple” the typical number of applications each semester since the 2016 election. ”

– “Trump's efforts to remake federal judiciary,” by Christian M. Wade, The Salem News: “The state’s two U.S. senators will have their ideas about who should fill vacancies on the U.S. District Court bench in Massachusetts, but despite longstanding tradition, legal observers say President Donald Trump may not pay them much heed. Of 17 federal judgeships in the state, two slots are open, created by a shift to senior status of U.S. District Court judges Douglas Woodlock and George O’Toole. ”

THE WARREN REPORT —

– “Elizabeth Warren says President Trump is ‘not the king,’” by The Associated Press: “Senator Elizabeth Warren says the country is in a perilous state with Republicans controlling the executive and legislative branches and President Donald Trump about to make his second Supreme Court nomination. The Massachusetts Democrat spoke at a rally Thursday in front of the Supreme Court, saying, ‘People around this country are worried and they’re right to worry.’ ”

– “Sen. Elizabeth Warren endorses Kara Eastman for Omaha-area House seat,” by Roseann Moring, Omaha-World Herald: “U.S. Sen. Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts, one of the most prominent leaders of the progressive wing of the Democratic Party, has endorsed Kara Eastman. Eastman is a nonprofit executive and Metropolitan Community College Board member who has been Exhibit A nationally for a group that wants to push the party toward progressive issues such as a single-payer health care system and more vocal support of abortion rights .”

ON THE STUMP —

FIRST IN PLAYBOOK – Rep. Niki Tsongas endorses Josh Zakim for Secretary of State, from the Zakim campaign: “Congresswoman Niki Tsongas, who represents the Massachusetts 3rd Congressional District, today announced her endorsement of Josh Zakim in his campaign for Massachusetts Secretary of State. … ‘The Commonwealth’s Secretary of State is responsible for protecting one of the most fundamental rights of our democracy – the right to vote,’ Tsongas said.”

– AFT Massachusetts to endorse Capuano for re-election, from the Capuano campaign: “Tthe American Federation of Teachers (AFT) Massachusetts, one of the state’s largest labor unions, will endorse U.S. Rep. Michael E. Capuano for re-election. Citing his work as an advocate for students and a strong fighter against Donald Trump’s dangerous policies, AFT Massachusetts President Beth Kontos and President of the Chelsea Teachers Union Don Dabenigno will endorse Rep. Capuano at their Chelsea union offices.”

– Four Boston City Councilors Endorse Jay Gonzalez, from the Gonzalez campaign: This afternoon at City Hall Plaza, Boston City Councilors Annissa Essaibi-George, Lydia Edwards and Kim Janey joined their colleagues Matt O’Malley and Michelle Wu in endorsing Jay Gonzalez for Governor. Though unable to be at the announcement, Councilor Ed Flynn also endorsed Gonzalez today. Councilors Edwards, Janey and Flynn are the newest members of the Boston City Council.

TSONGAS ARENA —

– “Alexandra Chandler (MA-3) Endorsed by State Rep. Kate Hogan (D-Stow),” from the Chandler campaign: Massachusetts State Representative Kate Hogan has endorsed Alexandra Chandler in the race to represent the 3rd Congressional District in Congress. Hogan represents the communities of Bolton, Hudson, Maynard, and Stow in the Massachusetts House of Representatives. Rep. Hogan is first sitting State Representative to endorse Chandler.”

– “Haverhill School Committee Member Rich Rosa Endorses L'Italien,” from the L’Italien campaign: “'Haverhill School Committee Member Rich Rosa announcing official support for Sen. L'Italien in CD3. ‘Barbara's rare combination of heart, integrity, and experience are what we need now more than ever in our next representative. She has something that nobody else in this race has, which is a proven track record as a lawmaker. Particularly, her track record as a champion on education issues, especially special education, is what makes me proud to work to make sure Barbara is our next congresswoman.’”

– Two national LGBT organizations endorse Rufus Gifford for Congress, from the Gifford campaign: Gifford has earned endorsements from the LGBT Equality PAC , led by LGBT members of Congress and the Congressional LGBT Equality Caucus, and the Victory Fund , a national organization dedicated to electing openly LGBT people.”

MOULTON MATTERS —

– “Democrats Bet On a New Generation of Vets to Deliver the House,” by Arit John, Bloomberg Businessweek: “Massachusetts Representative Seth Moulton may be the face of the Democratic Party’s efforts to recruit military veterans as candidates, but the former Marine gives credit where credit is due. ‘The No. 1 recruiter of Democratic veterans is Donald Trump,’ Moulton says during a recent interview in his office.For Congressional Democrats, the 2018 playbook looks a lot like the one from 2006, the last time they flipped the House of Representatives from Republican control. After years out of power, the party hopes that the combination of fresh-faced military veterans and an unpopular and divisive Republican president will help them win back the House next year. ”

THE KENNEDY COMPOUND —

– “US Rep. Joe Kennedy III, Democrats rebuke Trump administration for refusing to defend ACA's pre-existing condition protections,” by Shannon Young, MassLive.com: “Members of Massachusetts' congressional delegation joined House Democratic leaders Wednesday in condemning the Trump administration's refusal to defend an Affordable Care Act provision that guarantees access to health insurance regardless of any medical conditions. U.S. Reps. Joe Kennedy III, D-Brookline; and Richard Neal, D-Springfield, joined House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi, advocates and patients who benefitted from the ACA provision in highlighting the law's importance and urging President Donald Trump and congressional Republicans to stop such ‘attacks’ on health care. ”

WOOD WAR — Herald: “TERRIFYING” — Globe: “Gunman kills 5 at Md. paper,” “Investigator says law firm overbilled by millions,” “AT STAKE: THE FUTURE OF THE SUPREME COURT: Democrats count on abortion fight to draw out voters,” “Decision near for displaced Puerto Ricans,” “Interim superintendent pick set to make ‘important moves.’”

THE LOCAL ANGLE —

– “Police increasing security at Boston media outlets after Annapolis newspaper shooting,” by Alana Levene, Boston Globe: “Boston police officials said Thursday they have begun increasing security presence at major media outlets in the Boston area after a shooting at a newspaper in Annapolis, Md., left at least five people dead and several wounded. ‘While there are no credible concerns or information detailing similar threats directed towards media outlets in Boston, Commissioner Evans has called for increased and directed patrols in and around various media agencies throughout the city,’ Officer James Kenneally, a department spokesman, said in an e-mail. ”

– “UMass Boston interim chancellor: No ‘time limit,’” by Jennifer Smith, Dorchester Reporter: “As she looks forward to taking the helm at UMass Boston next month, incoming interim chancellor Katherine Newman has been doing her due diligence. She is a sociologist, after all, who has spent 39 years writing about the very kind of upward mobility through education that the public research institution is supposed to facilitate. ”

– “State could license first recreational marijuana shop Monday,” by Dan Adams, Boston Globe: “A medical marijuana dispensary near Worcester could become the first recreational pot store in Massachusetts — but it’s likely weeks away from opening for non-medical sales. The state Cannabis Control Commission announced Thursday it expects to vote next week on whether to issue a provisional license to Cultivate, a medical dispensary in Leicester that first opened last November. ”

– “Investigation alleges misconduct by Thornton Law Firm, recommends severe sanctions,” by Andrea Estes, Boston Globe: “An investigation unsealed Thursday in Boston federal court outlined a multimillion-dollar overbilling scheme by some of the nation’s top class-action law firms and alleged misconduct by a prominent former state lawmaker. The scathing 377-page report by a court-appointed special master took aim at the business practices of three well-known firms, including Boston-based Thornton Law Firm and its managing partner, former representative Garrett Bradley. ”

– “National marijuana survey plan announced by Massachusetts consultant and UMass-Dartmouth,” by Mike Plaisance, MassLive.com: “The Cannabis Community Care and Research Network of Somerville Thursday said it will work with the University of Massachusetts in Dartmouth to mount a national survey of marijuana use. ‘The survey is aimed to better understand consumer/patient demographics, attitudes, choices, methods of consumption and knowledge of cannabis products in legal cannabis states,’ a press release said. ”

– “Seized 'crime guns' linked to licensed dealers,” by Christian M. Wade, The Daily News of Newburyport: “More than one-third of the guns involved in crimes and seized by police in 2016 were originally sold legally by firearms dealers, according to newly released data. The state Executive Office of Public Safety and Security traced the origin of 514 of nearly 1,400 illegal guns taken off the streets by police in 2016 to the original sale by Massachusetts dealers. ”

HAPPY BIRTHDAY — to A&F Fiscal Policy Analyst Maya Jonas-Silver.

HAPPY BIRTHWEEKEND — to Plymouth County Register of Probate Matthew McDonough who celebrates Saturday and to Sunday birthday-ers DC 35 political director Roger Brunelle, Jr., Sen. Ryan Fattman, and Boston Herald columnist Kevin Franck.

DID THE HOME TEAM WIN? Yes! — The Red Sox beat the Angels 4-2.

DO NOT MISS THIS – THE LATEST EPISODE OF THE HORSE RACE: State Senate President Harriette Chandler joins us for a special extended edition of The Horse Race. We ask her about the Grand Bargain, legislation vs. ballot questions, the fallout from Stan Rosenberg, and what she has learned in her time at the top. Then WBUR's Shannon Dooling discusses what the immigration debate means for Massachusetts. Plus, what the NY-14 result means for the Pressley-Capuano matchup. Subscribe and listen on iTunes and Sound Cloud

Want to make an impact? POLITICO Massachusetts has a variety of solutions available for partners looking to reach and activate the most influential people in the Bay State. Have a petition you want signed? A cause you’re promoting? Seeking to increase brand awareness among this key audience? Share your message with our influential readers to foster engagement and drive action. Contact Jesse Shapiro to find out how: jshapiro@politico.com.

FOR MORE political and policy news from Massachusetts, check out: http://politi.co/1qNSlWx

SUBSCRIBE to the Playbook family: POLITICO Playbook http://politi.co/2lQswbh ... New York Playbook http://politi.co/1ON8bqW … Florida Playbook http://politi.co/1OypFe9 ... New Jersey Playbook http://politi.co/1HLKltF ... Massachusetts Playbook http://politi.co/1Nhtq5v … Illinois Playbook http://politi.co/1N7u5sb ... California Playbook http://politi.co/2bLvcPl ... Brussels Playbook http://politi.co/1FZeLcw ... London Playbook http://politi.co/2xfDPuK … All our political and policy tipsheets http://politi.co/1M75UbX

ARTICLE:'Where are the children?' Women march on Washington in act of 'civil disobedience' to protest family separationsARTICLE:'Where are the children?' Women march on Washington in act of 'civil disobedience' to protest family separationsARTICLE:'Where are the children?' Women march on Washington in act of 'civil disobedience' to protest family separationsARTICLE:'Where are the children?' Women march on Washington in act of 'civil disobedience' to protest family separationsARTICLE:We need 46 more Congressional votes to force a vote on restoring Net NeutralityWe need 46 more Congressional votes to force a vote on restoring Net Neutrality

The Discharge Petition that cleared the Senate in May is struggling in the House (as we knew it would).

The petition needs 218 House signatures to force a vote on whether to overrule Ajit Pai and the FCC and bring back Net Neutrality. It's been stalled at 172 for two weeks.

Here's how to check where your rep stands. You can use the same tool to call your lawmaker and remind them that there's an election coming up and you don't appreciate anyone fucking with your internet, and you'll remember who stood up for Big Telco when the polls open.

A discharge petition needs 218 signatures to force a House vote on the same net neutrality bill, and 218 votes would also be enough to pass the measure. So far, the petition has signatures from 172 representatives, all Democrats. That number hasn't changed in two weeks. "We're 46 [signatures] away from being able to force a vote on the resolution to restore the Open Internet Order," Sen. Ed Markey (D-Mass.) tweeted yesterday.

Bill to save net neutrality is 46 votes short in US House [Jon Brodkin/Ars Technica]

(via /.)ARTICLE:Effort To Save Net Neutrality Via Congressional Review Act Appears Stuck In NeutralEfforts to reverse the FCC's historically unpopular attack on net neutrality using the Congressional Review Act (CRA) appear stuck in neutral.

The CRA lets Congress reverse a regulatory action with a simply majority vote in the Senate and the House (which is how the GOP successfully killed FCC privacy protections last year). And while the Senate voted 52 to 47 back in May to reverse the FCC's attack on net neutrality, companion efforts to set up a similar vote in the House don't appear to be gaining much traction as the clock continues to tick. A discharge petition needs 218 votes to even see floor time, and another 218 votes to pass the measure.

But so far, the petition only currently has 172 likely votes, all Democrats:

The House #NetNeutrality discharge petition is at 172 signatures. We’re 46 away from being able to force a vote on the resolution to restore the Open Internet Order. Has your representative signed the petition to #SaveTheInternet? Check here: https://t.co/zKI7sxSwGj — Ed Markey (@SenMarkey) June 26, 2018

Again, not a single Republican in the House has signaled any interest in saving net neutrality. As we've long noted, the quest for a healthy internet free from anti-competitive meddling by telecom monopolies has long been idiotically framed as a partisan issue despite broad, bipartisan consumer support. ISPs and their numerous political proxy organizations have long enjoyed using rhetoric that only further fuels these divisions (derailing real consensus) by conflating meaningful consumer protections with a "government takeover of the internet," ideas that are happily parroted by many ISP cash-loving DC lawmakers.

Undaunted, net neutrality activists held an advocacy day yesterday trying to drum up some additional support among lawmakers among a clearly debate-fatigued public. Another net neutrality group, Fight for the Future, has constructed this page to track which lawmakers haven't signed on, while making it easy to contact those that haven't.

That said, this effort was always an uphill climb. Even if the CRA vote succeeded in the House, it would have to avoid a veto by Trump. Many activists I've spoken to believe a vote in both Houses would appeal to Trump's "populist" streak forcing him to bend to the whims of public consensus. But given Trump's version of populism tends to be as authentic as a Hollywood Wild West set and as consistent as a brush fire, that prediction always seemed a tad optimistic. Still, stranger things have happened, so maintaining hope in the face of this level of corruption isn't entirely outrageous.

That said, the best path forward for reversing the repeal is two fold. One, there remains a notable chance that the courts see the FCC's fraud-riddled net neutrality repeal as the blatant, facts-optional nonsense it actually is, and reverses it for being an "arbitrary and capricious" abuse of procedural norms and the FCC's obligation to represent the public. If that doesn't work, there's always voting in the the midterms and thereafter for a new breed of lawmakers that don't mindlessly place ISP campaign contributions above the welfare of the public, the internet, and genuine, healthy competition.ARTICLE:Hundreds arrested at Washington protest over Trump immigration policyNearly 600 protesters, mostly women, were arrested on Thursday after they staged a non-violent action in the heart of a US Senate office building in Washington against Donald Trump’s “zero-tolerance” policy towards immigrants and separation of families at the border.

The mass protest was one of several demonstrations that erupted across the country, providing a taste of what are expected to be much larger demonstrations on Saturday called by the Women’s March and the Center for Popular Democracy Action. The rallies are likely to get a further boost as a result of the announcement on Wednesday by Anthony Kennedy that he is retiring from the US supreme court, providing Trump with the chance to make a second ultra-conservative appointment to the nation’s highest court and prompting fears of a rollback of liberal protections.

Facebook Twitter Pinterest Demonstrators in opposition to the immigration policies of the Trump administration rally at the Hart Senate office building. Photograph: Jonathan Ernst/Reuters

The largest demonstration on Thursday saw the 90ft atrium of the Hart Senate office building overrun by hundreds of women who sat on the floor pumping their fists in the air. Many were draped in foil sheets as a statement on the flimsy bedding given to children and adults as they are held at US border detention facilities.

The protesters chanted “abolish Ice” and “we care” – a jab at Melania Trump for wearing a jacket with the words “I really don’t care, do U?” painted on its back as she visited one of the immigrant detention centers in Texas last week.

Among those arrested in the Senate building were Pramila Jayapal, a Democratic member of Congress representing Seattle. She said in a video posted on social media that she had joined the action to protest against “the inhumane and cruel ‘zero-tolerance’ policy of Donald Trump and this administration, the separation of families, the caging of children, and the imprisonment of asylum seekers”.

We will put our bodies on the line to stop Trump incarcerating children | Winnie Wong Read more

She added that she was proud to have been arrested among hundreds of others who believed that “the US is better and as a member of Congress I refuse to let this president and administration do what they are doing to children in my name”.

Facebook Twitter Pinterest Senator Elizabeth Warren cheers on demonstrators. Photograph: Jonathan Ernst/Reuters

Daily images are still emerging of distraught immigrant children separated from parents and not yet reunited, despite an executive order last week ending the policy of summarily tearing families apart and arresting the adults after anyone is caught crossing the border illegally.

In a written statement, the Capitol police said about 575 people were charged with unlawfully demonstrating inside the office building. The police said those arrested were being released after they were processed.

Winnie Wong, political adviser for the Women’s March, said the crowd’s fervor would translate into “the energy we will need to see at the ballot box in November”, when congressional control will be at stake.

Facebook Twitter Pinterest The actor Susan Sarandon, center, was among the activists protesting at the Hart office building. Photograph: J Scott Applewhite/AP

The Democratic senator Jeff Merkley of Oregon, who was one of the first to draw attention to children being held in detention camps along the border after being separated from their parents, appeared before the crowd. So did the Democrats Kirsten Gillibrand of New York and Edward Markey of Massachusetts.

“These folks are out here fighting for the core principles of our nation, and I applaud them for it,” Merkley said in an interview.

Meanwhile, hundreds more people gathered at a rally outside a federal courthouse in Brownsville, Texas, in the Rio Grande valley.

And dozens of protesters shut down a government meeting in Michigan in protest against a contract with the Immigration and Customs Enforcement (Ice) agency to house detainees at a local jail. Eight people also were arrested outside an Ice building in Portland, Oregon, that has been closed because of a round-the-clock demonstration.ARTICLE:About 100 people arrested in immigration protest at Capitol HillWashington (CNN) With her infant daughter in tow, Democratic Sen. Tammy Duckworth visited female activists in a Capitol Hill Senate building who are protesting the administration's "zero-tolerance" immigration policy

"I wanted to show my support for the folks here today," Duckworth, who gave birth to her second child in April, told CNN in an interview after she visited with protesters. "I could only imagine what it would be like to have my daughter -- my breastfeeding child -- ripped away from me the way some of these other moms' babies have been."

More than 1,000 female activists marched through Washington Thursday to protest the separation of children from their immigration parents at the US-Mexico border.

US Capitol Police arrested approximately 575 individuals with unlawfully demonstrating, including Rep. Pramila Jayapal, a Democrat from Washington.

Read MoreARTICLE:Democrats, with few options to stall Trump’s Supreme Court pick, will emphasize abortion stakesSenator Elizabeth Warren told activists at the Supreme Court Thursday she would fight the president’s nominee “with every bone in my body.”

WASHINGTON — Senate Democrats are vowing a fight for the ages to stop President Trump’s as-yet-unnamed Supreme Court pick from getting confirmed. Senator Elizabeth Warren said Thursday that she is “prepared to fight with every bone in my body.”

But with few procedural options to block Trump’s nominee, and uncertainty about whether they can even hold their caucus together, Democrats probably will have to settle for the next best option: using their fierce battle over a likely rightward shift on the high court to motivate voters in the 2018 congressional elections.

Women, especially female swing voters in suburbs, will be the targets of a relentless campaign focused on the likelihood of greater restrictions on abortion or even an outright reversal of Roe v. Wade, the 1973 Supreme Court decision that struck down abortion bans. Democrats are warning women could be “put in jail” under the reign of the future Supreme Court.

Advertisement

Justice Anthony Kennedy, who is retiring, is a moderately conservative swing justice who was pivotal in decisions enshrining gay people’s right to marry and striking down states’ attempts to limit abortion rights. His replacement could take the court sharply right on the environment, gay rights, and abortion, among other issues. Democrats think the threat could galvanize their base even more than Democratic voters’ dislike of the president.

Get This Week in Politics in your inbox: A weekly recap of the top political stories from The Globe, sent right to your email. Sign Up Thank you for signing up! Sign up for more newsletters here

“I didn’t think that our enthusiasm could get bigger, but a tempest is coming,” said Senator Chris Murphy, a Democrat from Connecticut.

Carolyn Kaster/Associated Press/file 2018 “I didn’t think that our enthusiasm could get bigger, but a tempest is coming,” said Senator Chris Murphy, a Democrat from Connecticut.

Republicans are also giddy at the prospect of facing what looks like a tough midterm election with the boost of a second Supreme Court justice under their belts.

“It’s good politics for Republicans,” said Alex Conant, a GOP political consultant who’s worked for Senator Marco Rubio. “I’d much rather have abortion be the topic this fall than Trump’s tweets.”

But Democrats think this could be a miscalculation if they are able to make the Supreme Court battle a referendum on the right to a legal abortion a few months before the election. About 70 percent of Americans oppose overturning Roe v. Wade, according to several polls from Pew and Quinnipiac. Many suburban Republicans eager to talk tax cuts and the booming economy are unlikely to benefit from a conversation about banning abortion.

Advertisement

While the Senate will be the focal point of the confirmation debate, Democrats have a better chance in the November elections of flipping the House from Republican control, and that is where the biggest impact could be.

“Having a national debate about overturning Roe v. Wade imperils Republicans in the suburban districts that are key to their chance of holding the House,” said Jesse Ferguson, a former staffer for the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee and Hillary Clinton’s presidential bid.

The battle is shaping up to be acrimonious, with many Senate Democrats still hopping mad over Senate majority leader Mitch McConnell’s move to block hearings for Barack Obama’s Supreme Court pick for nearly a year in 2016 because it was a presidential election year. Senator Ben Sasse said Wednesday that the once somber and bipartisan confirmation process has turned into “blood sport.”

MSNBC’s Rachel Maddow told Democrats on her show Wednesday night not to be “doormats” — urging them to unify as a caucus and use whatever tools necessary to block a pick.

But Democrats have few procedural tricks available. They can refuse to show up for votes, but can be compelled to return to the Senate floor under the institution’s rules. They can slow hearings, but only for so long.

Advertisement

“Ain’t gonna happen,” Senator John Cornyn of Texas, a Republican in Senate leadership, told reporters Thursday, referring to Democrats’ chances of blocking confirmation.

Democrats are painting the confirmation battle in apocalyptic terms, calling the prospect of an antiabortion conservative replacing Kennedy “terrifying” and raising the specter of women languishing in jails.

Senator Kirsten Gillibrand said “women’s lives are at risk,” with Kennedy’s departure. The New York Democrat questioned ‘‘whether we are going to be arresting women for making decisions about their bodies.’’

“So many of our fundamental rights, freedoms, and liberties — and the rule of law — are all at risk,” said former vice president Joe Biden.

Maddow raised the prospect of the court allowing states to outlaw birth control, which was legalized in 1965. “What if birth control was illegal? What would you do if birth control was illegal?” she asked on her show Wednesday.

J. Scott Applewhite/Associated Press Young activists demonstrated at the Supreme Court as President Trump prepared to choose a replacement for Justice Anthony Kennedy, on Capitol Hill in Washington on Thursday.

All sides are planning expensive advertising and e-mail blitzes in an attempt to mobilize the grass roots.

“The impact of Justice Kennedy’s announcement is enormous and terrifying — for everything from reproductive rights to health care to voting rights and beyond,” said Julie McClain Downey, a spokeswoman for Emily’s List, a group that works to elect women who support abortion rights. “The work we are doing here is imperative because it feels like our freedom depends on our success.”

The focus on Roe could have a particularly strong impact on female voters, who have driven Democratic victories in special elections in Alabama and Virginia since Trump was elected in 2016.

“Women around this country are already galvanized, they’re mobilizing politically in a way we haven’t seen in a generation,” said Senator Ed Markey of Massachusetts.

In addition to motivating their base, Democrats are hoping that stressing the importance of the historic Roe v. Wade decision could draw a handful of moderate Republicans to their side, putting pressure on Trump to pick a justice who refers to the decision as “settled law.”

Democrats hope to woo GOP Senators Susan Collins of Maine and Lisa Murkowski of Alaska, who are both in favor of abortion rights, to their side, robbing Trump of the majority he needs unless he picks someone who vows not to overturn Roe.

“This is a legacy vote,” Murphy said. “I don’t think you can say you are pro-choice if you cast a vote that will be looked upon as the one that criminalized abortion and put women in jail.”

But even if Collins and Murkowski were swayed by that argument, it’s unclear whether Democrats would hold together in opposition to a nominee who is evasive on the abortion question. A handful of Democratic senators up for reelection in red states are facing pressure to back the president’s pick no matter what.

Senator Joe Manchin of West Virginia, a Democrat who faces a tough reelection bid this year, said Thursday that he would judge the pick based on his or her qualifications and dismissed the idea that Democrats could influence the pick or delay the confirmation.

“We have very little control,” Manchin said.

Material from the Associated Press was used in this report. Liz Goodwin can be reached at elizabeth.goodwin@globe.com . Follow her on Twitter @lizcgoodwinARTICLE:Hundreds Arrested at Senate Office Building ProtestHundreds of protesters were arrested Thursday after staging a sit-in at a U.S. Senate office building in Washington to protest the Trump administration's immigration policy.

U.S. Capitol Police arrested 575 activists, mostly women, decrying President Donald Trump's "zero-tolerance" policy on admission of undocumented immigrants.

They chanted "What do we want? Free families!'' and "This is what democracy looks like,'' as they sat in the Hart Senate Office Building's atrium.

Protesters wrapped themselves in Mylar blankets, like the ones given to children separated from their families at the southern U.S. border and detained.

Democratic Senators Tammy Duckworth of Illinois, Maizi Hirono of Hawaii and Ed Markey of Massachusetts were among those who visited the protesters to lend their support.

Democratic Representative Pramila Jayapal of Washington, herself an immigrant, tweeted that she was among those arrested.

Under the zero-tolerance policy, the government has begun prosecuting all migrants caught entering the country without authorization. Trump has halted his policy of taking children from their detained parents under public pressure, but an estimated 2,000 of them are still being held, with many families saying they don't know how to locate them.

Similar protests also took place elsewhere around the country. Hundreds gathered at a rally outside a federal courthouse in Brownsville, Texas, near the U.S.-Mexico border in the Rio Grande Valley.

Dozens of people shut down a government meeting in Michigan to protest a contract with Immigration and Customs Enforcement to house detainees at a local jail.

Eight others were arrested outside an ICE building in Portland, Oregon, that has been closed because of a round-the-clock demonstration.ARTICLE:Anti-ICE Protest: Women Arrested in Senate Building While Protesting Donald Trump’s Immigration PolicyARTICLE:Protesters jam Senate office building to protest Trump 'zero tolerance' policyHundreds of women gathered in the lobby of a Senate office building Thursday to protest the Trump administration’s “zero tolerance” immigration policy.

The protesters, who came from all over the country, demanded an end to the detention of families illegally crossing the southern border, as well as the abolishment of ICE.

ADVERTISEMENT

Many were clad in silver space blankets, and shirts with slogans like “Deport Trump” and “I really do care,” a parody of the jacketwore on her first visit to detained children in Texas.

”Our goal is to bring hope and maybe a ray of light and some inspiration in a time that’s been really dark, and let the people at the border know that they are not alone and that we see them,” said a protester named Cecelia.

She declined to give her last name, but said she traveled from Philadelphia for the demonstration.

The group met at Freedom Plaza in downtown Washington, D.C. on Thursday morning. They first marched to the Department of Justice, and then to the Hart Senate Office Building.

The crowd sat in the Hart atrium, singing: “We’re going to rise like the water, gonna shut detentions down.”

The protesters were joined in Hart by various Democratic lawmakers, including Sens. Kirsten Gillibrand Kirsten Elizabeth GillibrandWhen Democrats cry 'Abolish ICE,' they really mean 'abolish borders' The animating forces behind the Democratic Party are true, radical leftists Sen. Sanders calls for restructuring ICE as part of immigration overhaul MORE (N.Y.), Ed Markey Edward (Ed) John MarkeyLawmakers press Trump admin for list of migrant kids separated from families Dem lawmakers join nationwide protests against Trump immigration policies Protesters jam Senate office building to protest Trump 'zero tolerance' policy MORE (Mass.), Elizabeth Warren Elizabeth Ann WarrenWhen Democrats cry 'Abolish ICE,' they really mean 'abolish borders' CVS Health CEO 'surprised' by Azar's comments on drug prices Dem fires back at White House: Don't talk to me until you reunite separated families MORE (Mass.), Richard Blumenthal (Conn.) and Tammy Duckworth Ladda (Tammy) Tammy DuckworthLawmakers press Trump admin for list of migrant kids separated from families The Hill's Morning Report — Sponsored by Better Medicare Alliance — Protests and anger: Washington in turmoil as elections near Ocasio-Cortez responds to Dem senator who said policies 'too far to the left' don't win in Midwest MORE (Ill.), who arrived holding her infant.

.@SenDuckworth says she’s here to support the protesters here demanding an end to immigrant family separation and detention. #Immigration #WomenDisobey #dc pic.twitter.com/vKZDodj8b0 — Marissa J. Lang (@Marissa_Jae) June 28, 2018

Capitol Police said they arrested 575 people at the protest, including Rep. Pramila Jayapal Pramila JayapalProgressives poised to shape agenda if Dems take back House Ex-ICE director: It should be an 'abolish Trump' movement, not an 'abolish ICE' movement Dem generation gap widens MORE (D-Wash.).

Caroline Gardner contributed



ARTICLE:Altering Human Genetics Through VaccinationJon Rappoport, Guest

Waking Times

The National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID) has launched efforts to create a vaccine that would protect people from most flu strains, all at once, with a single shot.

Over the years, I’ve written many articles refuting claims that vaccines are safe and effective, but we’ll put all that aside for the moment and follow the bouncing ball.

Massachusetts Senator and big spender, Ed Markey, has introduced a bill that would shovel no less than a billion dollars toward the universal flu-vaccine project.

Here is a sentence from an NIAID press release that mentions one of several research approaches:

“NIAID Vaccine Research Center scientists have initiated Phase 1/2 studies of a universal flu vaccine strategy that includes an investigational DNA-based vaccine (called a DNA ‘prime’)…”

This is quite troubling, if you know what the phrase “DNA vaccine” means. It refers to what the experts are touting as the next generation of immunizations.

Instead of injecting a piece of a virus into a person, in order to stimulate the immune system, synthesized genes would be shot into the body. This isn’t traditional vaccination anymore. It’s gene therapy.

In any such method, where genes are edited, deleted, added, no matter what the pros say, there are always “unintended consequences,” to use their polite phrase. The ripple effects scramble the genetic structure in numerous unknown ways.

Here is the inconvenient truth about DNA vaccines—

They will permanently alter your DNA

The reference is the New York Times, 3/15/15, “Protection Without a Vaccine.” It describes the frontier of research—the use of synthetic genes to “protect against disease,” while changing the genetic makeup of humans. This is not science fiction:

“By delivering synthetic genes into the muscles of the [experimental] monkeys, the scientists are essentially re-engineering the animals to resist disease.”

“’The sky’s the limit,’ said Michael Farzan, an immunologist at Scripps and lead author of the new study.”

“The first human trial based on this strategy — called immunoprophylaxis by gene transfer, or I.G.T. — is underway, and several new ones are planned.” [That was three years ago.]

“I.G.T. is altogether different from traditional vaccination. It is instead a form of gene therapy. Scientists isolate the genes that produce powerful antibodies against certain diseases and then synthesize artificial versions. The genes are placed into viruses and injected into human tissue, usually muscle.”

Here is the punchline: “The viruses invade human cells with their DNA payloads, and the synthetic gene is incorporated into the recipient’s own DNA. If all goes well, the new genes instruct the cells to begin manufacturing powerful antibodies.”

Read that again: “the synthetic gene is incorporated into the recipient’s own DNA.”

Alteration of the human genetic makeup.

Not just a “visit.” Permanent residence. And once a person’s DNA is changed, he will live with that change—and all the ripple effects in his genetic makeup—for the rest of his life.

The Times article taps Dr. David Baltimore for an opinion:

“Still, Dr. Baltimore says that he envisions that some people might be leery of a vaccination strategy that means altering their own DNA, even if it prevents a potentially fatal disease.”

Yes, some people might be leery. If they have two or three working brain cells.

This is genetic roulette with a loaded gun. Anyone and everyone on Earth injected with a DNA vaccine will undergo permanent and unknown genetic changes…

And the further implications are clear. Vaccines can be used as a cover for the injections of any and all genes, whose actual purpose is re-engineering humans in far-reaching ways.

The emergence of this Frankenstein technology is paralleled by a shrill push to mandate vaccines, across the board, for both children and adults. The pressure and propaganda are planet-wide.

The freedom and the right to refuse vaccines has always been vital. It is more vital than ever now.

It means the right to preserve your inherent DNA.

About the Author

Jon Rappoport is the author of three explosive collections, THE MATRIX REVEALED, EXIT FROM THE MATRIX, and POWER OUTSIDE THE MATRIX, Jon was a candidate for a US Congressional seat in the 29thDistrict of California. He maintains a consulting practice for private clients, the purpose of which is the expansion of personal creative power. Nominated for a Pulitzer Prize, he has worked as an investigative reporter for 30 years, writing articles on politics, medicine, and health for CBS Healthwatch, LA Weekly, Spin Magazine, Stern, and other newspapers and magazines in the US and Europe. Jon has delivered lectures and seminars on global politics, health, logic, and creative power to audiences around the world. You can sign up for his free emails at NoMoreFakeNews.com or OutsideTheRealityMachine.

(To read about Jon’s mega-collection, Exit From The Matrix, click here.)

This article (Altering Human Genetics Through Vaccination) was originally created and published by Jon Rappaport’s Blog and is re-posted here with permission.ARTICLE:Police arrest 575 at Capitol Hill immigration protestsJune 28 (UPI) -- WASHINGTON -- Police arrested 575 women staging a sit-in at the Senate office building Thursday demanding an end to the Trump administration's zero-tolerance policy toward undocumented immigrants.

The protest there and at the Justice Department was part of a day of civil disobedience organized by Women's March members leading up to a larger rally planned by them and other groups Saturday.

Some 1,000 protesters circled the Department of Justice as they chanted "DOJ Disobey" and "We Care." They paused for a moment of silence for the migrant children they said were unaccounted for.

Political and public outcry against the administration's policy of separating parents from children upon arrest prompted President Donald Trump to sign an executive order last week saying parents and children would be kept together in detention. Administration officials have offered different explanations for how the policy was being implemented, and how and when all approximately 2,300 children would be reunited with parents.

The executive order has "been signed but what are the actions that are being taken?" said Diane Dresdner, 60, who drove from Northern Virginia to help direct the protesters. "They're separating parents from children, they're also separating brothers from sisters and young siblings from older siblings. That's horrific. Horrific."

Laura Divito of Long Island, N.Y., said, "I don't believe anything that this particular president is saying and that's because of his history of constant lying."

"I don't know what kind of country I'm living in anymore because this is not the America that I know," she said. "What America has become is not the America I grew up with."

For others, however, the Trump administration's policies served to highlight an existing problem.

"Everyone keeps saying, 'This isn't the America that I know,' but I mean, this is," said Jill Manrique, 33, of Skokie, Ill. Manrique said she was compelled to participate partially because of her Mexican and Jewish heritage.

"I think it's important to not pretend America's this place that didn't do this before and that hasn't treated people like garbage, because it has," she added. "And now it's just time for everyone to wake up and change it."

After the Department of Justice protests, many of the women moved on to Capitol Hill, where they staged a sit-in at the Hart Office Building.

Eva Malecki, communications director for Capitol Police, said the department charged about 575 people with unlawfully demonstrating. She said they were being processed on the scene before being released.

Democratic Sens. Tammy Duckworth of Illinois, Ed Markey of Massachusetts, Mazie Hirono of Hawaii, Kirsten Gillibrand of New York and Richard Blumenthal of Connecticut visited the protesters to show their support.

Duckworth, who had her new baby daughter in tow, told CNN "I wanted to show my support for the folks here today ... I could only imagine what it would be like to have my daughter -- my breastfeeding child -- ripped away from me the way some of these other moms' babies have been."

The protest was peaceful, CNN reported.

It wasn't the only immigration-related protest held in the country Thursday. In Portland, Ore., Department of Homeland Security officers in riot gear removed protesters camping out at an Immigration and Customs Enforcement facility, KOIN-TV reported. Officers dismantled the protesters' tens, but more than 100 demonstrators remained outside the ICE building.

Police arrested and later released at least eight people in the Oregon protest.

Rob Sperling of the Federal Protective Service told KOIN-TV that though there was some screaming, "nothing was violent or anything like that" and it actually remained "very calm and peaceful."

Farther south, hundreds of people gathered in a protest at the federal courthouse in Brownsville, Texas, the American Civil Liberties Union of Texas, which organized the demonstration told Houston Public Media.

Meanwhile, first lady Melania Trump made another trip to the border Thursday to visit a temporary detention facility for children and adults in Arizona.

"I want to thank you for all your hard work that you do," she told Border Protection Commissioner Kevin McAleenan. "And I know how dangerous and difficult your daily jobs are. I really appreciate all you do on behalf of the country ... I'm here to support you and give my help, whatever I can for behalf of the children and the families. Thank you for having me."

McAleenan said 1,100 unaccompanied children entered at the Arizona ports of entry since October 2017, including a 6-year-old boy left alone near Luke Air Force Base with a Coke bottle in hand.

"People have to understand the dangers of the desert, of the heat, of the violence that exists out there," McAleenan said. "This is something that our people encounter on a daily basis."

Crossing the border illegally is a misdemeanor under federal law, and for a person who has already been deported once it's a low-level felony, but the Trump administration's zero-tolerance policy announced in April prosecutes both with no exceptions even if a person requests asylum.

Since the day he announced his presidential campaign, Trump has made securing the southern border a cornerstone of his presidency. He has used examples of violent crimes committed by undocumented immigrations to shore up support for a border wall and his zero-tolerance policies.

"I always hear that -- 'Oh no, the [undocumented immigration] population is safer than the people that live in the country.' You've heard that, fellows, right? And I say is that possible? The answer is it is not true. You hear like they are better people than what we have, than our citizens, it is not true," he said last week.

Trump signed an executive order last week to end the policy of separating immigrant children from their families after national outcry, replacing it with a policy of family detention. That left officials scrambling to figure out how to detain families together until Monday when border officials temporarily stopped referring most immigrant families for prosecution.

A federal judge in California ordered Tuesday that immigrant children separated from their families at the U.S.-Mexican border must be reunited within 30 days -- and children under 5 within 14 days based on an ACLU suit. The Department of Health and Human Services estimated more than 2,000 children were still in immigration detention centers separate from their parents, at that time.ARTICLE:Sen. Tammy Duckworth, Baby in Arms, Joins Immigration Protests on Capitol HillSen. Tammy Duckworth (D-IL), who recently gave birth, brought her infant daughter as she joined a large demonstration on Capitol Hill on Thursday targeting the Trump administration’s immigration policies.

The protesters were drawing attention to the separation of families seeking asylum at the southern border, a practice that was temporarily halted by an executive order from President Donald Trump.

“I could only imagine what it would be like to have my daughter—my breastfeeding child—ripped away from me the way some of these other moms’ babies have been,” Duckworth said, referring to the Trump administration’s “zero tolerance” policy, which has led to the separation of immigrant families who illegally cross the southern border.

Other Democratic senators also attended the protest, including Sens. Jeff Merkley (D-OR), Kirsten Gillibrand (D-NY), and Ed Markey (D-MA).

Demonstrators were wearing foil to represent the foil-like sleeping bags that children inside the detention facilities were using.

“We have responsibilities under international treaties to treat people with respect when they seek asylum. We have national laws that require it,” Merkley told The Daily Beast.

The Oregon Democrat traveled to southern Texas recently to call attention to the Trump administration policy, which has spurred bipartisan opposition outrage but has yet to lead to a negotiated solution.

Trump’s executive order will likely be subject to legal challenges, and Senate Republicans are still cobbling together a proposal that would permanently end the separation of families while also increasing the number of immigration judges in order to expedite asylum cases. But that measure has yet to attract Democratic support, which is necessary in order to clear the 60-vote threshold. The House failed to pass two conservative immigration bills this week and last week that would have addressed the family-separation issue.

Capitol Police said 575 people were arrested from the Hart building for unlawfully demonstrating. Rep. Pramila Jayapal (D-WA), a progressive who has been outspoken on immigration issues, was among those arrested. The protest took place in the atrium of the Hart Senate office building, where many senators’ personal offices are located.ARTICLE:Police arrest hundreds during immigration protest at capitolWASHINGTON — With her infant daughter in tow, Democratic Sen. Tammy Duckworth visited female activists in a Capitol Hill Senate building who are protesting the administration’s “zero-tolerance” immigration policy

“I wanted to show my support for the folks here today,” Duckworth, who gave birth to her second child in April, told CNN in an interview after she visited with protesters. “I could only imagine what it would be like to have my daughter — my breastfeeding child — ripped away from me the way some of these other moms’ babies have been.”

More than 1,000 female activists marched through Washington Thursday to protest the separation of children from their immigration parents at the US-Mexico border.

US Capitol Police arrested approximately 575 individuals with unlawfully demonstrating, including Rep. Pramila Jayapal, a Democrat from Washington.

The arrests have been peaceful so far, with the protesters not arguing with Capitol police officers during arrests and no cuffs being put on them.

Other Democratic senators — including Ed Markey of Massachusetts, Mazie Hirono of Hawaii, Kirsten Gillibrand of New York and Richard Blumenthal of Connecticut — also visited the protesters to support their efforts.

The protestors chanted “abolish ICE” as well as “where are the children?” as well as other chants that are hard to hear within the building.

The activists sat on the floor of the Senate building with emergency blankets to demand Congress act to end the Trump administration policies that criminalize and detain undocumented immigrants and separates their children from them.

Congress is set to leave town for a week-long recess without passing any legislation to address the situation at the US border. On Wednesday, the House failed to pass legislation that would have address in part several high-profile immigration-related policies including border wall funding and an eventual pathway to citizenship for recipients of the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program.

In an executive order last week, President Donald Trump said his administration was seeking more authority to detain families together until the end of their immigration proceedings.

The order instructs federal agencies — notably the Department of Defense — to prepare facilities to house the potentially thousands of families who will be detained.ARTICLE:Capitol Police Arrest 575 People Protesting Trump Immigration Policies At Senate BuildingThe Capitol Police charged approximately 575 people with unlawfully demonstrating in the atrium of the Hart Senate Building. They are being processed on the scene and then released.

Hundreds of women already arrested demanding an end to family detention. We’re still singing for justice. #abolishICE pic.twitter.com/gsFPvnb0rn — Women's March (@womensmarch) June 28, 2018

More than a thousand female protesters, joined by Democratic senators, marched two miles down Pennsylvania Avenue to protest the Trump Administration's family detention and separation policies, and demanded the abolishment of Immigration and Customs Enforcement, ABC reports. The walk ended in the Hart Senate building, where Capitol Police arrested many of them in response to an act of civil disobedience.

Chanting "WE CARE" and "ABOLISH ICE," the protesters are demanding Congress act to end Trump's policies that criminalize and detain undocumented immigrants and separate detained families. ICE is a common acronym for the U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement agency.

Women are being arrested by the hundreds in Congress demanding an end to the criminalization of immigrants. #EndFamilyDetention #AbolishICE pic.twitter.com/ns5KC4FRlV — Women's March (@womensmarch) June 28, 2018

Women's March organizers were involved in today's action, along with local D.C. advocacy groups. The rally started in Freedom Plaza at around 11 a.m and proceeded down Pennsylvania Avenue until participants reached the Capitol. Once they reached the building, women sat on the ground and waited to be carted off. Police began arresting them in groups.

More than 1,000 women are in DC today to risk arrest standing up to Trump’s racist agenda. We are here to decriminalize immigrants, #AbolishICE, and #EndFamilyDetention. Photo by @KishaBari pic.twitter.com/BbJ4XtErZ2 — Women's March (@womensmarch) June 28, 2018

Protesters walked around wearing mylar blankets similar to those being handed out to immigrant children detained and separated from their families.

Susan Sarandon front and center now on a women’s march down Pennsylvania Avenue to the Capitol. More on the ongoing event from @Marissa_Jae: https://t.co/2wPPLkg4Rz pic.twitter.com/pyFSg572jU — Dan Zak (@MrDanZak) June 28, 2018

“Women are outraged at the separation of families,” said Linda Sarsour, one of last year's Women’s March Organizer. “We are outraged of all the things that are unfolding in our country."

Foil blankets are piling up as women are arrested here at the Senate. @RepJayapal joined us to demand an end to immigrant detention. Photo credit @KishaBari pic.twitter.com/bEe7pi4Z2U — Women's March (@womensmarch) June 28, 2018

Democratic Sens. Ed Markey of Massachusetts, Mazie Hirono of Hawaii, Kirsten Gillibrand of New York and Richard Blumenthal of Connecticut visited the protesters to support their efforts. Sen. Tammy Duckworth was spotted in her wheelchair with her daughter in her lap.

#WomenDisobey: Protesters slowly working their way into the Hart Senate building for a series of arrest actions.



Everyone (myself included) taking a break in the cool atrium after the 2-mile walk, the midday sun is intense. pic.twitter.com/Kl7WLxCKWF — Alejandro Alvarez (@aletweetsnews) June 28, 2018

"We are here to say we’re ready to sacrifice and we’re ready to leave our jobs, leave our families to come and take this act of civil disobedience here,” she said.

The actress Susan Sarandon made an appearance at the march, and she was arrested in the second group of protesters in the Hart Building, where 50 senators have their offices, according to Washington Post reporter Marissa Lang.

#WomenDisobey: Arrests continuing here in the Hart building, it’s been 40 minutes and police have only led away about a quarter of the crowd. pic.twitter.com/kCy6AtI48n — Alejandro Alvarez (@aletweetsnews) June 28, 2018

The march began near the Department of Justice, where speakers rallied supporters by sharing their experiences with immigration and calling for action. Before the march, protesters were split into four groups to review the procedures if arrested.

Congresswoman Sheila Jackson Lee of Texas called for ongoing mobilization beyond Thursday's protest. “This is not a day event,” Lee told a crowd of protesters. “This is an everyday event.”

People showed their support through handmade signs, including one that read “Don’t have a heart of I.C.E.” Others marked “We Care” on their palms. Still other protesters wore jackets with “I really care. Do you?” painted in white on their backs, a reaction to the controversy that followed First Lady Melania Trump’s trip to the southwest to visit detained children. As she boarded a plane in Washington D.C, photographers could clearly read the message "I really don't care. Do u?" on the back of her jacket, which reportedly retails from Zara for $39. While the First Lady took the jacket off before exiting the plane, it was widely seen as an inappropriate choice of clothing.

As women protested downstairs, senators began coming down to shake their hands and say thank you.ARTICLE:King wins panel approval despite Democrats' oppositionKing wins panel approval despite Democrats' opposition

With help from Tanya Snyder and Brianna Gurciullo

TAG, YOU’RE IT: The Senate Commerce Committee approved Heidi King's nomination to lead NHTSA on a razor-thin, party-line vote Wednesday after it was initially scuttled last month due to fears of low Republican attendance. Ranking member Bill Nelson (D-Fla.) said he was voting no because King "lacks the fire in the belly to protect consumers from something which is killing" people — meaning, defective Takata airbags. Chairman John Thune (R-S.D.) told reporters afterward he thought the unanimous Democratic opposition was “driven by Nelson” and that other Democrats “fell in line behind him.” Sen. Ed Markey (D-Mass.), though, cited a different reason for voting no: fuel economy standards, which he said King wants to roll back.

Story Continued Below

What’s next: King could be the next nominee to sit in the purgatory that's plaguing FTA nominee Thelma Drake — committee-approved but awaiting a vote by the full Senate. Calendar issues are undoubtedly a factor, but Democratic opposition could continue to dog King. No senator has yet copped to putting a hold on her confirmation on the floor, but we’ll be polling members to find out what’s in store.

FINANCE TO KEEP LOW PROFILE ON FAA BILL: The Senate Finance Committee could hold a markup of its own on the FAA bill’s tax title, but it probably won’t — at least according to a Commerce Committee staffer on Wednesday. He said Finance will probably bring its tax title as an amendment once the bill hits the floor. Commerce leaders are hotlining the FAA bill (S. 1405 (115)) to clear up any issues that could bog down passage and squeeze it into as little time as possible on the Senate floor.

Note: Now that the Senate’s top priority is confirming a new Supreme Court justice before the midterms, floor time is at an all-time premium.

IT’S THURSDAY: Thanks for tuning in to POLITICO’s Morning Transportation, your daily tipsheet on all things trains, planes, automobiles and ports. Stephanie is your driver. Send tips, scoops and song requests to @Steph_Beasley or sbeasley@politico.com.

In the town where I was born / Lived a man who sailed to sea / And he told us of his life / In the land of submarines / So we sailed up to the sun / Till we found a sea of green / And we lived beneath the waves / In our yellow submarine

LISTEN HERE: Follow MT’s playlist on Spotify. What better way to start your day than with songs (picked by us and readers) about roads, rails, rivers and runways?

POLITICO will be reporting from inside the World Gas Conference June 25-29. Sign up now for our pop-up conference newsletter to receive on-the-ground insights and information every afternoon from POLITICO Pro Energy Editor Matt Daily.

NOT-SO-HAPPY ANNIVERSARY: Wednesday marked one year since the House Energy and Commerce Digital Commerce and Consumer Protection Subcommittee held the first hearing on its self-driving car bill (H.R. 3388 (115)), which the full committee unanimously approved and then sailed through a voice vote on the House floor — only to be met with months of stagnation in the Senate. “We’re running out of time,” Subcommittee Chairman Bob Latta (R-Ohio) told our Tanya Snyder. “I’m very concerned that if we don’t get this done, we’ll have this patchwork [of state regulations] and we’re going to have companies from other countries developing this technology and it won’t be here.” He also said the uptick in traffic deaths compels them to act.

Kick in the pants: “You look at an industry that’s just a hair under a trillion dollars, we move a piece of legislation of this magnitude out with bipartisanship with a unanimous vote, I think that speaks volumes,” Latta said. He and ranking member Jan Schakowsky (D-Ill.) wrote an op-ed recently and have put out several press releases as the anniversary approached urging the Senate to act.

SETTING THEIR SIGHTS A LITTLE LOWER: Safety groups have pressed the Senate Commerce Committee to include semi-autonomous vehicles in its driverless car bill, and it seems they’re listening. Staffers, if not members, are discussing the inclusion of Level 2 vehicles in the bill — which can steer, accelerate and brake themselves but leave drivers to do the more sophisticated tasks — in the wake of high-profile crashes involving Tesla’s Autopilot. In both of those crashes, the people behind the wheel apparently overestimated the car's abilities and failed to take over the controls when prompted. Tanya has more for Pros.

SECURITY BILLS CLEAR COMMITTEE: The Senate Commerce Committee approved several transportation security bills by voice vote Wednesday. One (S. 3094 (115)) would specify that the Coast Guard can only require the use of biometric readers for transportation worker ID cards after it submits an assessment of the program. Another bill (H.R. 4467 (115)) would require the Federal Air Marshal Service to use risk-based strategies when allocating resources for international and domestic flight coverage. And another (H.R. 4559 (115)) would direct TSA to review improving global aviation security standards, including cybersecurity standards, across the global aviation system.

SUMMER, SUMMER, SUMMER TIME: TSA expects to see a surge in airport travel volumes in the lead up to the July Fourth holiday, agency chief David Pekoske told reporters Wednesday. He said 2.6 million travelers are expected to go through security checkpoints this Friday alone. “We expect that this coming Friday will potentially be one of the busiest days ever in TSA history in terms of passenger throughput,” he said. The spike will occur as the agency also works with international airports to implement new rules requiring additional screening of powders in carry-on bags, starting on Saturday. The procedures, which include asking passengers to remove food items and other clutter from bags, are already in effect domestically.

The impact: Pekoske said during normal travel periods, the majority of PreCheck passengers get through checkpoints within 10 minutes and the bulk of regular travelers typically wait no more than 20 minutes. But it can increase to 45 or 60 minutes when lanes are pushed to capacity, he said. He advised travelers to arrive early.

More ch-ch-changes: Pekoske also noted that an interim final rule from TSA and Customs and Border Protection that requires advanced screening of all air cargo entering the U.S. went into effect earlier this month. The new policy “allows us to do a process quite similar actually to what we do with passengers when passengers buy a ticket,” he said. “[W]e check passengers against our databases and assign risk based on those results. We’re doing the very same thing for cargo.”

The land of tomorrow: TSA and CBP also are in discussions about merging PreCheck and Global Entry and streamlining enrollment for “trusted travelers,” Pekoske said. But he added that the process could take a year or more to complete.

LET ME EXPLAIN: Delta Air Lines caught some flak last week for not pressing the Trump administration to avoid using its planes to carry separated migrant children — which set Delta apart from American, United and other airlines. Delta did release a statement after President Donald Trump issued an executive order on the matter, saying: “Recent reports of families being separated are disheartening and do not align with Delta’s core values.” Defending his company Wednesday during a National Press Club event, Delta CEO Ed Bastian said that “many of the actions that were interpreted as separating” families at the time were actually actions to fly “kids to reunite [them] with families.” He added that “the story got out before the facts got out,” and Delta wanted to “understand the facts” before making a statement.

THE ‘NANNY DOGS’: A pit bull owner has launched a petition on the Care2 website against Delta’s impending restrictions on service animals, including a ban on pit bulls and "bully" breeds. “As more people become aware that we should be blaming the deed, not the breed, the trend worldwide has been to end bans against certain dogs,” Kelsey Bourgeois, the author of the petition, said. “Apparently Delta did not get the memo.” Delta is one of several airlines implementing new rules in the wake of what it says has been an uptick in animal-related attacks and other incidents on flights. Delta’s new service animal rules go into effect July 10. The petition currently has more than 26,000 signatures.

STATE OF AIR TRAVEL: A new Morning Consult travel report shows that the majority of Americans still prefer to get around in their cars, but when they do choose to fly, most consider Southwest, American, Delta and United to be the top choices. And Southwest enjoys the most favorable opinions, overall. Other findings of note were that 74 percent of people polled considered ticket cost the most important factor when mulling air travel and also that costs for premium services outweighed airline preferences when it came to choosing a carrier.

THE AUTOBAHN:

— "Blind pedestrians sue the city to improve crosswalk safety." The New York Times.

— “Delta CEO looks to Asia, Europe for revenue growth.” USA Today.

— “Facebook ends Aquila internet drone project.” The Drive.

— “Boston braces for robo-taxis to make downtown traffic even worse.” Bloomberg.

— “The elevated era.” Curbed New York.

THE COUNTDOWN: DOT appropriations run out in 95 days. The FAA reauthorization expires in 95 days. Highway and transit policy is up for renewal in 826 days.ARTICLE:Effort To Save Net Neutrality Via Congressional Review Act Appears Stuck In NeutralEfforts to reverse the FCC's historically unpopular attack on net neutrality using the Congressional Review Act (CRA) appear stuck in neutral.

The CRA lets Congress reverse a regulatory action with a simply majority vote in the Senate and the House (which is how the GOP successfully killed FCC privacy protections last year). And while the Senate voted 52 to 47 back in May to reverse the FCC's attack on net neutrality, companion efforts to set up a similar vote in the House don't appear to be gaining much traction as the clock continues to tick. A discharge petition needs 218 votes to even see floor time, and another 218 votes to pass the measure.

But so far, the petition only currently has 172 likely votes, all Democrats:

The House #NetNeutrality discharge petition is at 172 signatures. We’re 46 away from being able to force a vote on the resolution to restore the Open Internet Order. Has your representative signed the petition to #SaveTheInternet? Check here: https://t.co/zKI7sxSwGj — Ed Markey (@SenMarkey) June 26, 2018

Again, not a single Republican in the House has signaled any interest in saving net neutrality. As we've long noted, the quest for a healthy internet free from anti-competitive meddling by telecom monopolies has long been idiotically framed as a partisan issue despite broad, bipartisan consumer support. ISPs and their numerous political proxy organizations have long enjoyed using rhetoric that only further fuels these divisions (derailing real consensus) by conflating meaningful consumer protections with a "government takeover of the internet," ideas that are happily parroted by many ISP cash-loving DC lawmakers.

Undaunted, net neutrality activists held an advocacy day yesterday trying to drum up some additional support among lawmakers among a clearly debate-fatigued public. Another net neutrality group, Fight for the Future, has constructed this page to track which lawmakers haven't signed on, while making it easy to contact those that haven't.

That said, this effort was always an uphill climb. Even if the CRA vote succeeded in the House, it would have to avoid a veto by Trump. Many activists I've spoken to believe a vote in both Houses would appeal to Trump's "populist" streak forcing him to bend to the whims of public consensus. But given Trump's version of populism tends to be as authentic as a Hollywood Wild West set and as consistent as a brush fire, that prediction always seemed a tad optimistic. Still, stranger things have happened, so maintaining hope in the face of this level of corruption isn't entirely outrageous.

That said, the best path forward for reversing the repeal is two fold. One, there remains a notable chance that the courts see the FCC's fraud-riddled net neutrality repeal as the blatant, facts-optional nonsense it actually is, and reverses it for being an "arbitrary and capricious" abuse of procedural norms and the FCC's obligation to represent the public. If that doesn't work, there's always voting in the the midterms and thereafter for a new breed of lawmakers that don't mindlessly place ISP campaign contributions above the welfare of the public, the internet, and genuine, healthy competition.ARTICLE:Good news for INCUMBENTS — ‘RED FLAG’ gun bill heads to BAKER’s desk — WARREN, KENNEDY to rally against family separationsGood news for INCUMBENTS — ‘RED FLAG’ gun bill heads to BAKER’s desk — WARREN, KENNEDY to rally against family separations

By Lauren Dezenski (ldezenski@politico.com; @LaurenDezenski) with Brent D. Griffiths (bgriffiths@politico.com; @BrentGriffiths)

GOOD MORNING, MASSACHUSETTS.

Story Continued Below

PROGRAMMING NOTE — The Massachusetts Playbook will be in the highly capable hands of Stephanie Murray and Brent Griffiths next week while I head out of town on vacation. Send them your scoops, tips, and takes posthaste to smurray@politico.com and bgriffiths@politico.com and I look forward my well-rested return to your inbox on July 9.

SO FAR THIS YEAR, IT’S GOOD TO BE AN INCUMBENT — We’re approaching the dog-days of the summer campaign season, yet a key tenet has held fast throughout the primary: Gov. Charlie Baker is extremely popular. Meanwhile, his challengers — and challenges to incumbents across the board — continue to struggle to break through to voters.

New polling shows that Baker is even more popular among Democrats. The poll, conducted by MassINC Polling Group and WBUR shows that Baker’s favorable rating among Democratic primary voters, at 68 percent, is slightly higher than his favorable rating among Republican primary voters at 66 percent.

As MassINC pollster Steve Koczela put it recently , it’s “not out of the question Charlie Baker would win a statewide Democratic primary in MA.”

Another key data point: Up and down the ticket, challengers to incumbents are struggling to get traction. In the Democratic primary matchup between Bob Massie and Jay Gonzalez, 61 percent of voters remain undecided, while just 16 percent support Gonzalez and 13 percent support Massie.

Sen. Elizabeth Warren remains incredibly popular, though just among Democrats. The senior senator has a 79 percent favorability among Democratic primary voters, compared to an 11 percent favorability among Republican primary voters.

Among Republican primary voters, 48 percent are still undecided when it comes to her potential opponents. Geoff Diehl has an edge with 23 percent support compared to Beth Lindstrom’s 13 percent and John Kingston’s 12 percent.

In the most closely watched (and admittedly somewhat inside-baseball) race for secretary of state in a generation, more than 20 years of incumbency are proving to be a boon to Secretary of State Bill Galvin. Despite an aggressive challenge (and Democratic state convention endorsement win) by Boston City Councilor Josh Zakim, Galvin currently has 46 percent support among Democratic primary voters to Zakim’s 17 percent.

Have a tip, story, suggestion, birthday, anniversary, new job, or any other nugget for the Playbook? Get in touch: ldezenski@politico.com.

TODAY — Boston Mayor Martin Walsh and Police Commissioner William Evans hold press conference about Fourth of July public safety — Southcoast Health awards Rep. Joe Kennedy III as a “Hero of Health” at the Charlton Memorial Hospital in Fall River — Centro Presente, an immigrant advocacy organization, plans to protest on the State House steps to condemn human rights violations at the border and US military involvement in central America. Meanwhile, another immigration protest is taking place this weekend — and drawing the likes of Sen. Elizabeth Warren and Rep. Joe Kennedy III. They plan to attend a rally against family separation on Saturday, set to kick off at Boston City Hall and march to the Boston Common just before noon.

DATELINE BEACON HILL —

– “Gov. Charlie Baker signs $15 minimum wage, paid family leave into law,” by Shira Schoenberg, MassLive.com: “A new mother in Massachusetts will get paid time off to care for her baby, beginning in 2021. A son will get paid time off to care for his ailing parent. A fast food worker will earn at least $15 an hour by 2023. Gov. Charlie Baker on Thursday signed into law a bill that will reshape the state's workplaces. ”

– “How progressives and businesses made an unlikely deal on family leave,” by Shirley Leung, Boston Globe: “The progressives and key business groups began meeting in November in a conference room overlooking the Common at the Massachusetts Business Roundtable. Each side had four negotiators. There were ground rules, chief among them: no media leaks. In other words, if there was a policy disagreement, no negotiating in the press. They needed to trust each other. ”

– “Massachusetts Legislature sends 'red flag' gun bill to Gov. Charlie Baker,” by Shira Schoenberg, MassLive.com: “The Massachusetts Legislature on Thursday sent Gov. Charlie Baker a bill that would allow a family or household member to petition a judge to confiscate someone's gun if the person poses a danger to themselves or others. ‘This bill, when it's signed into law, will save lives, and that's what it's really all about," said Rep. David Linsky, D-Natick, who sponsored an earlier version of the bill. ”

– “Hearing in suit against Rosenberg coming up,” by MJ Tidwell, Amherst Bulletin: “A hearing to decide whether to reveal the name of the anonymous plaintiff who has leveled a lawsuit at former Senate President Stanley Rosenberg and his husband Bryon Hefner will reconvene on July 11. The civil lawsuit alleges that Rosenberg, 68, “knew or was aware” that Hefner, 31, posed a risk to individuals in the Massachusetts Statehouse and that Rosenberg and Hefner had an agreement or understanding allowing Hefner access to those individuals, ‘with whom Defendant Hefner could engage in unwanted sexual touching. ’”

– “Gov. Charlie Baker extends housing assistance for families displaced by Hurricane Maria,” by Shannon Young, MassLive.com: “Gov. Charlie Baker will extend disaster relief housing for some families who relocated to Massachusetts after Hurricane Maria ravaged Puerto Rico last fall, officials confirmed Thursday. With Federal Emergency Management and Red Cross shelter aid set to end Saturday, Baker spokesman Brendan Moss said the governor will allow evacuees with children to utilize disaster relief housing supports for another month. ”

– “Massachusetts will start FY19 without permanent budget,” by Shira Schoenberg, MassLive.com: “Massachusetts will start the next fiscal year without a permanent budget in place, after lawmakers were unable to reach an agreement in time. The 2019 fiscal year begins July 1, which is Sunday. ”

– “Citing 'full' plate, Massachusetts oversight panel isn't touching State Police scandals,” by Gintautas Dumcius, MassLive.com: “A day after three state troopers were charged with embezzling public funds, Massachusetts senators who sit on an oversight panel said they don't plan on taking a look into the troubled law enforcement agency. State Sen. Kathleen O'Connor Ives, chair of the Senate Post Audit and Oversight Committee , said her panel has its ‘plate full. ’”

DATELINE DC —

– “McGovern’s Rise Could Mean Double the Influence for Western Mass…,” by Matt Szafranski, Western Massachusetts Politics & Insight: “For some time now, the punditocracy has given Democrats an edge in the race for the US House of Representatives this year. For Western Massachusetts that would elevate Springfield Congressman Richard Neal to chairman of Ways & Means. He may not become the only rep for Western Massachusetts with new clout next year. ”

“Political internships surge in the age of Trump,” by James Sullivan, Boston Globe: “Most members of the state’s solidly Democratic congressional delegation have seen a surge in prospective interns, as the Trump administration moves through its second year of governance … The offices of Representatives Joe Kennedy III, Seth Moulton, Jim McGovern, and Bill Keating all reported a rise in applications, as did that of Senator Elizabeth Warren. A spokeswoman for Senator Ed Markey said his office has fielded “double if not triple” the typical number of applications each semester since the 2016 election. ”

– “Trump's efforts to remake federal judiciary,” by Christian M. Wade, The Salem News: “The state’s two U.S. senators will have their ideas about who should fill vacancies on the U.S. District Court bench in Massachusetts, but despite longstanding tradition, legal observers say President Donald Trump may not pay them much heed. Of 17 federal judgeships in the state, two slots are open, created by a shift to senior status of U.S. District Court judges Douglas Woodlock and George O’Toole. ”

THE WARREN REPORT —

– “Elizabeth Warren says President Trump is ‘not the king,’” by The Associated Press: “Senator Elizabeth Warren says the country is in a perilous state with Republicans controlling the executive and legislative branches and President Donald Trump about to make his second Supreme Court nomination. The Massachusetts Democrat spoke at a rally Thursday in front of the Supreme Court, saying, ‘People around this country are worried and they’re right to worry.’ ”

– “Sen. Elizabeth Warren endorses Kara Eastman for Omaha-area House seat,” by Roseann Moring, Omaha-World Herald: “U.S. Sen. Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts, one of the most prominent leaders of the progressive wing of the Democratic Party, has endorsed Kara Eastman. Eastman is a nonprofit executive and Metropolitan Community College Board member who has been Exhibit A nationally for a group that wants to push the party toward progressive issues such as a single-payer health care system and more vocal support of abortion rights .”

ON THE STUMP —

FIRST IN PLAYBOOK – Rep. Niki Tsongas endorses Josh Zakim for Secretary of State, from the Zakim campaign: “Congresswoman Niki Tsongas, who represents the Massachusetts 3rd Congressional District, today announced her endorsement of Josh Zakim in his campaign for Massachusetts Secretary of State. … ‘The Commonwealth’s Secretary of State is responsible for protecting one of the most fundamental rights of our democracy – the right to vote,’ Tsongas said.”

– AFT Massachusetts to endorse Capuano for re-election, from the Capuano campaign: “Tthe American Federation of Teachers (AFT) Massachusetts, one of the state’s largest labor unions, will endorse U.S. Rep. Michael E. Capuano for re-election. Citing his work as an advocate for students and a strong fighter against Donald Trump’s dangerous policies, AFT Massachusetts President Beth Kontos and President of the Chelsea Teachers Union Don Dabenigno will endorse Rep. Capuano at their Chelsea union offices.”

– Four Boston City Councilors Endorse Jay Gonzalez, from the Gonzalez campaign: This afternoon at City Hall Plaza, Boston City Councilors Annissa Essaibi-George, Lydia Edwards and Kim Janey joined their colleagues Matt O’Malley and Michelle Wu in endorsing Jay Gonzalez for Governor. Though unable to be at the announcement, Councilor Ed Flynn also endorsed Gonzalez today. Councilors Edwards, Janey and Flynn are the newest members of the Boston City Council.

TSONGAS ARENA —

– “Alexandra Chandler (MA-3) Endorsed by State Rep. Kate Hogan (D-Stow),” from the Chandler campaign: Massachusetts State Representative Kate Hogan has endorsed Alexandra Chandler in the race to represent the 3rd Congressional District in Congress. Hogan represents the communities of Bolton, Hudson, Maynard, and Stow in the Massachusetts House of Representatives. Rep. Hogan is first sitting State Representative to endorse Chandler.”

– “Haverhill School Committee Member Rich Rosa Endorses L'Italien,” from the L’Italien campaign: “'Haverhill School Committee Member Rich Rosa announcing official support for Sen. L'Italien in CD3. ‘Barbara's rare combination of heart, integrity, and experience are what we need now more than ever in our next representative. She has something that nobody else in this race has, which is a proven track record as a lawmaker. Particularly, her track record as a champion on education issues, especially special education, is what makes me proud to work to make sure Barbara is our next congresswoman.’”

– Two national LGBT organizations endorse Rufus Gifford for Congress, from the Gifford campaign: Gifford has earned endorsements from the LGBT Equality PAC , led by LGBT members of Congress and the Congressional LGBT Equality Caucus, and the Victory Fund , a national organization dedicated to electing openly LGBT people.”

MOULTON MATTERS —

– “Democrats Bet On a New Generation of Vets to Deliver the House,” by Arit John, Bloomberg Businessweek: “Massachusetts Representative Seth Moulton may be the face of the Democratic Party’s efforts to recruit military veterans as candidates, but the former Marine gives credit where credit is due. ‘The No. 1 recruiter of Democratic veterans is Donald Trump,’ Moulton says during a recent interview in his office.For Congressional Democrats, the 2018 playbook looks a lot like the one from 2006, the last time they flipped the House of Representatives from Republican control. After years out of power, the party hopes that the combination of fresh-faced military veterans and an unpopular and divisive Republican president will help them win back the House next year. ”

THE KENNEDY COMPOUND —

– “US Rep. Joe Kennedy III, Democrats rebuke Trump administration for refusing to defend ACA's pre-existing condition protections,” by Shannon Young, MassLive.com: “Members of Massachusetts' congressional delegation joined House Democratic leaders Wednesday in condemning the Trump administration's refusal to defend an Affordable Care Act provision that guarantees access to health insurance regardless of any medical conditions. U.S. Reps. Joe Kennedy III, D-Brookline; and Richard Neal, D-Springfield, joined House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi, advocates and patients who benefitted from the ACA provision in highlighting the law's importance and urging President Donald Trump and congressional Republicans to stop such ‘attacks’ on health care. ”

WOOD WAR — Herald: “TERRIFYING” — Globe: “Gunman kills 5 at Md. paper,” “Investigator says law firm overbilled by millions,” “AT STAKE: THE FUTURE OF THE SUPREME COURT: Democrats count on abortion fight to draw out voters,” “Decision near for displaced Puerto Ricans,” “Interim superintendent pick set to make ‘important moves.’”

THE LOCAL ANGLE —

– “Police increasing security at Boston media outlets after Annapolis newspaper shooting,” by Alana Levene, Boston Globe: “Boston police officials said Thursday they have begun increasing security presence at major media outlets in the Boston area after a shooting at a newspaper in Annapolis, Md., left at least five people dead and several wounded. ‘While there are no credible concerns or information detailing similar threats directed towards media outlets in Boston, Commissioner Evans has called for increased and directed patrols in and around various media agencies throughout the city,’ Officer James Kenneally, a department spokesman, said in an e-mail. ”

– “UMass Boston interim chancellor: No ‘time limit,’” by Jennifer Smith, Dorchester Reporter: “As she looks forward to taking the helm at UMass Boston next month, incoming interim chancellor Katherine Newman has been doing her due diligence. She is a sociologist, after all, who has spent 39 years writing about the very kind of upward mobility through education that the public research institution is supposed to facilitate. ”

– “State could license first recreational marijuana shop Monday,” by Dan Adams, Boston Globe: “A medical marijuana dispensary near Worcester could become the first recreational pot store in Massachusetts — but it’s likely weeks away from opening for non-medical sales. The state Cannabis Control Commission announced Thursday it expects to vote next week on whether to issue a provisional license to Cultivate, a medical dispensary in Leicester that first opened last November. ”

– “Investigation alleges misconduct by Thornton Law Firm, recommends severe sanctions,” by Andrea Estes, Boston Globe: “An investigation unsealed Thursday in Boston federal court outlined a multimillion-dollar overbilling scheme by some of the nation’s top class-action law firms and alleged misconduct by a prominent former state lawmaker. The scathing 377-page report by a court-appointed special master took aim at the business practices of three well-known firms, including Boston-based Thornton Law Firm and its managing partner, former representative Garrett Bradley. ”

– “National marijuana survey plan announced by Massachusetts consultant and UMass-Dartmouth,” by Mike Plaisance, MassLive.com: “The Cannabis Community Care and Research Network of Somerville Thursday said it will work with the University of Massachusetts in Dartmouth to mount a national survey of marijuana use. ‘The survey is aimed to better understand consumer/patient demographics, attitudes, choices, methods of consumption and knowledge of cannabis products in legal cannabis states,’ a press release said. ”

– “Seized 'crime guns' linked to licensed dealers,” by Christian M. Wade, The Daily News of Newburyport: “More than one-third of the guns involved in crimes and seized by police in 2016 were originally sold legally by firearms dealers, according to newly released data. The state Executive Office of Public Safety and Security traced the origin of 514 of nearly 1,400 illegal guns taken off the streets by police in 2016 to the original sale by Massachusetts dealers. ”

HAPPY BIRTHDAY — to A&F Fiscal Policy Analyst Maya Jonas-Silver.

HAPPY BIRTHWEEKEND — to Plymouth County Register of Probate Matthew McDonough who celebrates Saturday and to Sunday birthday-ers DC 35 political director Roger Brunelle, Jr., Sen. Ryan Fattman, and Boston Herald columnist Kevin Franck.

DID THE HOME TEAM WIN? Yes! — The Red Sox beat the Angels 4-2.

DO NOT MISS THIS – THE LATEST EPISODE OF THE HORSE RACE: State Senate President Harriette Chandler joins us for a special extended edition of The Horse Race. We ask her about the Grand Bargain, legislation vs. ballot questions, the fallout from Stan Rosenberg, and what she has learned in her time at the top. Then WBUR's Shannon Dooling discusses what the immigration debate means for Massachusetts. Plus, what the NY-14 result means for the Pressley-Capuano matchup. Subscribe and listen on iTunes and Sound Cloud

Want to make an impact? POLITICO Massachusetts has a variety of solutions available for partners looking to reach and activate the most influential people in the Bay State. Have a petition you want signed? A cause you’re promoting? Seeking to increase brand awareness among this key audience? Share your message with our influential readers to foster engagement and drive action. Contact Jesse Shapiro to find out how: jshapiro@politico.com.

FOR MORE political and policy news from Massachusetts, check out: http://politi.co/1qNSlWx

SUBSCRIBE to the Playbook family: POLITICO Playbook http://politi.co/2lQswbh ... New York Playbook http://politi.co/1ON8bqW … Florida Playbook http://politi.co/1OypFe9 ... New Jersey Playbook http://politi.co/1HLKltF ... Massachusetts Playbook http://politi.co/1Nhtq5v … Illinois Playbook http://politi.co/1N7u5sb ... California Playbook http://politi.co/2bLvcPl ... Brussels Playbook http://politi.co/1FZeLcw ... London Playbook http://politi.co/2xfDPuK … All our political and policy tipsheets http://politi.co/1M75UbX

ARTICLE:'Where are the children?' Women march on Washington in act of 'civil disobedience' to protest family separationsARTICLE:'Where are the children?' Women march on Washington in act of 'civil disobedience' to protest family separationsARTICLE:'Where are the children?' Women march on Washington in act of 'civil disobedience' to protest family separationsARTICLE:'Where are the children?' Women march on Washington in act of 'civil disobedience' to protest family separationsARTICLE:'Where are the children?' Women march on Washington in act of 'civil disobedience' to protest family separationsARTICLE:'Where are the children?' Women march on Washington in act of 'civil disobedience' to protest family separationsARTICLE:'Where are the children?' Women march on Washington in act of 'civil disobedience' to protest family separationsARTICLE:'Where are the children?' Women march in DC to protest family separationsARTICLE:'Where are the children?' Women march in DC to protest family separations