Hundreds of women gathered in the lobby of a Senate office building Thursday to protest the Trump administration’s “zero tolerance” immigration policy.

The protesters, who came from all over the country, demanded an end to the detention of families illegally crossing the southern border, as well as the abolishment of ICE.

ADVERTISEMENT

Many were clad in silver space blankets, and shirts with slogans like “Deport Trump” and “I really do care,” a parody of the jacketwore on her first visit to detained children in Texas.

”Our goal is to bring hope and maybe a ray of light and some inspiration in a time that’s been really dark, and let the people at the border know that they are not alone and that we see them,” said a protester named Cecelia.

She declined to give her last name, but said she traveled from Philadelphia for the demonstration.

The group met at Freedom Plaza in downtown Washington, D.C. on Thursday morning. They first marched to the Department of Justice, and then to the Hart Senate Office Building.

The crowd sat in the Hart atrium, singing: “We’re going to rise like the water, gonna shut detentions down.”

The protesters were joined in Hart by various Democratic lawmakers, including Sens. Kirsten Gillibrand Kirsten Elizabeth GillibrandWhen Democrats cry 'Abolish ICE,' they really mean 'abolish borders' The animating forces behind the Democratic Party are true, radical leftists Sen. Sanders calls for restructuring ICE as part of immigration overhaul MORE (N.Y.), Ed Markey Edward (Ed) John MarkeyLawmakers press Trump admin for list of migrant kids separated from families Dem lawmakers join nationwide protests against Trump immigration policies Protesters jam Senate office building to protest Trump 'zero tolerance' policy MORE (Mass.), Elizabeth Warren Elizabeth Ann WarrenWhen Democrats cry 'Abolish ICE,' they really mean 'abolish borders' CVS Health CEO 'surprised' by Azar's comments on drug prices Dem fires back at White House: Don't talk to me until you reunite separated families MORE (Mass.), Richard Blumenthal (Conn.) and Tammy Duckworth Ladda (Tammy) Tammy DuckworthLawmakers press Trump admin for list of migrant kids separated from families The Hill's Morning Report — Sponsored by Better Medicare Alliance — Protests and anger: Washington in turmoil as elections near Ocasio-Cortez responds to Dem senator who said policies 'too far to the left' don't win in Midwest MORE (Ill.), who arrived holding her infant.

.@SenDuckworth says she’s here to support the protesters here demanding an end to immigrant family separation and detention. #Immigration #WomenDisobey #dc pic.twitter.com/vKZDodj8b0 — Marissa J. Lang (@Marissa_Jae) June 28, 2018

Capitol Police said they arrested 575 people at the protest, including Rep. Pramila Jayapal Pramila JayapalProgressives poised to shape agenda if Dems take back House Ex-ICE director: It should be an 'abolish Trump' movement, not an 'abolish ICE' movement Dem generation gap widens MORE (D-Wash.).

Caroline Gardner contributed



