White House tries to revive air traffic control spinoff plan

With help from Brianna Gurciullo and Tanya Snyder

IF WE HAD IT OUR WAY: The Trump administration on Thursday unveiled a far-reaching proposal to reorganize the federal government, with four pages dedicated to our favorite department. The document makes clear that the administration still wants air traffic control operations taken out of the FAA, even though President Donald Trump abandoned a bill from House Transportation Chairman Bill Shuster that would’ve done that. “It had a chance five months ago. I’ve passed an FAA bill and had to take out privatization,” Shuster told CQ’s Jacob Fischler. “[The bill] passed the House and the Senate’s not going to do it. So five months too late. Great idea.”

Story Continued Below

The administration also proposes:

— Giving DOT responsibility over commercial navigation instead of the Army Corp of Engineers.

— Transferring Saint Lawrence Seaway lock operations outside the government.

— Designating DOT as in charge of “permitting alterations to bridges and aids to coastal navigation” instead of the Coast Guard.

— Putting transit security grants under FTA instead of FEMA, and surface transportation security programs under DOT instead of TSA.

— Studying whether the “organizational design” of the DOT Office of the Secretary “is optimal for allowing it to most effectively carry out its statutory responsibilities.”

IT’S FRIDAY: Thanks for tuning in to POLITICO’s Morning Transportation, your daily tipsheet on all things trains, planes, automobiles and ports. Stephanie will be out for the next few days. But don’t worry, you’ll be in Tanya’s steady hands. Be sure to send your tips, scoops and song requests to her at tsnyder@politico.com or @TSnyderDC.

“She was a real royal lady, true patron of the arts / She said the best country singers die in the back of classic cars.”

LISTEN HERE: Follow MT’s playlist on Spotify. What better way to start your day than with songs (picked by us and readers) about roads, rails and runways?

POLITICO will be reporting from inside the World Gas Conference June 25-29. Sign up now for our pop-up conference newsletter to receive on-the-ground insights and information every afternoon from POLITICO Pro Energy editor Matt Daily.

TWEETABLE: “[Rep. Garret] Graves says @Transport Chairman @RepBillShuster and RM @RepPeterDeFazio will introduce an infrastructure bill this year. Will deal with roads and bridges and promises to be ‘thought-provoking’ he says.” - CQ’s Fischler

HOLD UP: The Coast Guard is proposing to delay implementation of its rule requiring cargo facilities to install biometric readers to verify transportation workers' ID cards. The final rule was scheduled to go into effect on Aug. 23, but the Coast Guard wants to extend the deadline for compliance by three years for certain facilities. Both lawmakers and industry groups have criticized the service’s rollout of the rule, saying that it has not provided enough guidance on how to meet the requirements. The Senate Commerce Committee announced Thursday that it planned to mark up a bill next week, S. 3094 (115), that would mandate a full delay of the rule until the Coast Guard submits a report assessing the need for biometric card readers. The House Homeland Security Committee approved a similar measure earlier this month.

Close, but no cigar: The American Chemistry Council, which supports both bills, said the Coast Guard proposal doesn’t go far enough. “It does not extend the deadline for all facilities, just for some,” ACC spokesman Scott Jensen told MT. “So there will be still a number of facilities that need to meet the August deadline.” Given that, he said congressional action is still necessary. ACC is one of three groups that filed a lawsuit against the Coast Guard in April over the requirement. The International Liquid Terminals Association and the Fertilizer Institute are the other two plaintiffs.

SENATE PANEL OKs DHS SPENDING BILL: Senate appropriators quickly approved a $55 billion fiscal year 2019 spending bill for DHS on Thursday. The legislation would help TSA and Customs staff up and help the Coast Guard pay for a long-sought new heavy polar icebreaker, among other items. Here’s our rundown of some of the top items from earlier this week.

TIGHTEN UP: Four House Democrats think FRA’s exemptions from the positive train control mandate are “overly broad,” allowing railroads to get out of installing the technology by, say, cutting service. “We strongly urge FRA to revise its regulations to tighten PTC exemptions and focus on ways to help railroads comply with the law rather than circumvent it through regulatory carve-outs,” Reps. Peter DeFazio (D-Ore.), Mike Capuano (D-Mass.), Steve Cohen (D-Tenn.) and Jim Cooper (D-Tenn.) wrote in a letter to FRA Administrator Ron Batory. Brianna has more for Pros.

READY FOR YOUR CLOSE-UP? Passengers flying into or out of Orlando International Airport will soon have to get their faces scanned. For now, U.S. citizens can opt out, though privacy watchdogs worry that passengers aren’t made aware of their right to do so, the AP reports. Eight of the nation’s busiest airports already use face-scan technology on a more limited basis.

Quicker to the gate: The U.S. Travel Association hailed the move, with President and CEO Roger Dow saying it would make travel more efficient and shorten wait times. "The U.S. travel community is hopeful that biometric entry and exit systems will soon be implemented in airports nationwide,” he said.

KING UP TO BAT: Heidi King will finally get a vote on her nomination to head NHTSA in the Senate Commerce Committee next week. After a May 22 vote was scuttled due to low Republican attendance (and Democratic opposition), the committee is now planning to take up King’s nomination on Wednesday. Democrats are still likely to oppose her confirmation, dismayed at the pace of rulemaking and the wishy-washy answers she gave on climate change, among others. Sens. Richard Blumenthal (D-Conn.) and Ed Markey (D-Mass.) have not yet gotten a response to their letter urging King to investigate and initiate a long-overdue rulemaking on keyless ignition safety. Check out King’s responses to Republican questions from her confirmation hearing here and to top committee Democrat Bill Nelson’s questions here.

OUSTED: Intel CEO Brian Krzanich was forced to resign Thursday after violating the company’s prohibition on managers having romantic relationships with employees. Krzanich chaired the Drone Advisory Committee and held to the philosophy that “the future of drones is more about what you can do with that data … than the actual flight itself,” as he said at a drone event last fall. "Data is the new oil.”

GROUP PUSHES SENATE PROBE OF MCCASKILL: A conservative watchdog group is calling for a Senate ethics investigation into Sen. Claire McCaskill’s use of a private plane owned by her husband during her campaign travels, POLITICO’s Elana Schor reports. “The ethics investigation request, filed by the right-leaning Foundation for Accountability and Civic Trust, or FACT, cites McCaskill’s 2017 Senate financial disclosure, which reported between $0 and $201 of income from the plane owned by her husband’s company.” McCaskill, the top Democrat on the Senate Homeland Security Committee, is in a competitive midterm race with Missouri Attorney General Josh Hawley.

CAUTION: DRIVER (ASSIST) IN TRAINING: An automated car demonstration on Capitol Hill on Thursday, hosted by Consumer Reports, had a somewhat different angle than industry-sponsored demonstrations in the past. The group showcased both the benefits and limitations of the cars’ advanced driver-assist systems and discussed why some of the technologies should be mandated for all new cars. Consumer Reports also said Senate legislation on automated vehicles is dangerously insufficient. Consumer Reports engineers piloting the cars, for example, made sure to let riders know that the cars would go through stop signs and red lights if human drivers didn’t brake. The cars that were showcased are considered Level 2 vehicles, which are not covered by the bill currently languishing in the Senate.

FOR YOUR RADAR: Norwegian Air Shuttle Founder and CEO Bjørn Kjos sat down with POLITICO Europe reporter Saim Saeed to discuss the possible sale of the airline, his controversial push for more fuel-efficient engines and the use of biofuels. Pros can read the full interview here.

SLICE OF PI: “Steven Akey, vice president of government affairs for Bridgestone Americas, will retire at the end of the month. In an interview with [POLITICO Influence], Akey said his decision to retire was part of a pact he made with his wife. Prior to moving to the private sector, Akey was director of public affairs at the Department of Transportation under President Bill Clinton. He told PI that his background in transportation led him to the tire industry. Among the most pressing issues facing the tire industry is the ‘rapidly changing landscape of technology’ as well as the rise in ride-sharing. ‘If you think of ride-sharing, you think of those vehicles being used much more than the car I drive to and from work,’ Akey said. ‘You've got to figure out how to best compete in that space.’ In addition to his work at Bridgestone Americas, Akey was a board member and on several committees for the U.S. Tire Manufacturers Association.”

THE AUTOBAHN:

— "This new system could help air taxis and drone deliveries avoid crashing." Popular Science.

— "Tax ruling could lead to more money for Mississippi roads." The Associated Press.

— “U.K. cabinet minister resigns over Heathrow expansion.” POLITICO Europe.

— “Elon Musk's tunnel vision for Los Angeles.” Bloomberg.

— "‘It was a challenging day’: Wilson Bridge crash triggered an hours-long traffic nightmare." The Washington Post.

— “U.K. government launches hunt for chief Brexit aviation negotiator.” POLITICO Europe.

THE COUNTDOWN: DOT appropriations run out in 101 days. The FAA reauthorization expires in 101 days. Highway and transit policy is up for renewal in 832 days.